.TH AXE 1 "January 1994" "aXe Release 6.0"
.SH NAME 
aXe - an X editor 
.SH SYNOPSIS 
.B axe 
[ -toolkitoption ...] [ -option ... ] [ filename ... ] [ -buffer filename ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION 
.I aXe
is a simple to use text editor for X that represents a significant
improvement over xedit. Also built around the Athena Text Widget it
features, amongst other things,
.DS

   o multiple windows
   o multiple buffers
   o default menu interface
   o configurable menus
   o optional configurable button interface
   o minibuffer for expert use and access to external filters
   o provision for defining a keyboard macro
   o geometry specification and resizing in terms of characters
   o file selection via a browser
   o knowledge of line numbers
   o parenthesis matching
   o regular expression searching
   o restricted or unlimited undo
   o ability to change font
   o easy entry of control codes
   o xterm-like keymap feature
   o easy runtime setting of selected preferences (resources)
   o both brief and comprehensive (hypertext) on-line help
   o server mode with cooperating client programs
   o optional extension language using Tcl
   o optional Xaw3d widget set compatability
   o collection of reusable widgets that embody the functionality of aXe
.DE
.PP
By default aXe provides a menu interface to some common Text Widget
operations and most of its extra features. An optional button interface,
in which there is one button present for every static menu entry,
can be selected via the keyword 
.I -buttons,
or by setting the top level resource
.I buttons.
A reduced button interface is configurable.
.PP
Individual file names on the command line will be allocated to
separate windows. A list of file names introduced by the keyword
.I -buffer
will be allocated to buffers belonging to the same window (an
older, still supported feature, enables the same to be achieved by
quoting the list of names). Note that files destined for individual windows
must precede those for buffers if the -buffer keyword is used. An initial
number of windows to open can
be specified on the command line by using the keyword
.I -windows
or by giving the top level resource
.I windows
a numeric value.
The value of windows is ignored if the files specified on the command line
require more than that number of windows.
.PP
If a top level geometry resource is provided, e.g. by using the toolkit
keyword
.I -geometry,
then the width and height fields will be interpreted to mean the numbers 
of columns and rows respectively that editing widnows are to have.
.PP
aXe also acts as a server of editing windows to cooperating clients. 
Two, coaxe and faxe, are provided as part of the aXe suite. Server mode is
the default, but can be switched off by using the command line keyword 
.I -noserver,
or by setting the top level resource
.I server 
False
.PP 
aXe has comprehensive on-line help, so, to avoid having to keep
the information up to date in two places, it will not be duplicated
here. 
.SH ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
That aXe makes use of code from Byron Rakitzis' rc command interpreter that
is based on AT&T's Plan 9 shell of the same name is duly acknowledged.
.SH SEE ALSO
xedit(1), Athena Widget (Xaw) documentation 
.SH AUTHOR
Jim Wight (j.k.wight@newcastle.ac.uk)
.br
Department of Computing Science, University of Newcastle, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK, NE1 7RU

 
