.\" -*-Text-*-
.\";;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
.\"
.\" File:         xpilot.6
.\" Id:		  $Id: xpilot.man,v 1.1 1994/02/23 14:40:09 jkh Exp $
.\" Description:  XPilot man page
.\" Author:       Bjoern Stabell, Ken Ronny Schouten & Bert Gijsbers
.\" Modified:     910520
.\" Language:     Text
.\" Package:      xpilot
.\"
.\" (c) Copyright 1991-93, the XPilot authors.
.\"
.\";;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
.TH XPILOT 6 "Requires UDP/IP and The X Window System"
.ds )H GNU Public License 2.0 applies
.ds ]W XPilot Release 3.0: July 1993
.if n .ad l	\" If nroff formatter, adjust left margin only
.if t .ad b	\" If troff formatter, adjust both margins

.SH NAME

xpilot \- XPilot/UX  Multiplayer gravity war game client


.SH SYNOPSIS

.B xpilot
.B [-help]
.B [-version]
.B [-name \fInickname\fC]
.B [-team \fIteam-number\fC]
.B [-join]
.B [-list]
.B [-shutdown [\fImessage\fC]]
.B [-display \fIstring\fC]
.B [-port \fIport-number\fC]
.B [\fIserver-host ...\fC]


.SH OVERVIEW

XPilot is a multiplayer game which looks a bit like Thrust for
the Commodore 64.  Thrust has some similarities with Atari's
coin-up games Gravitar and Asteriods (not a misspelling) - they
were the originals.  Several clones have appeared for various
computers, among others Gravity Force for the Commodore Amiga.

The main objective of the game varies as you can choose different
game modes, although the only modes supported as of today are
\fBcombat\fP (optionally with teams and/or limited lives) and
\fBrace\fP.  The former mode focuses more strongly on shooting
each other down, while the latter is more a piloting test than
anything else.

To start playing, you need to connect to a \fBserver\fP by
using a \fBclient\fP program called \fIxpilot\fP.  If there are
no servers running, you will have to start one of your own (see
man-page \fIxpilots(6)\fP).


.SS Options

.TP 15
.B -help
Prints some help, including commandline options.
.TP 15
.B -version
Prints the current version.
.TP 15
.B -name \fIplayer-name\fP
Lets you use an alternative name during the play (may be handy :).  If this
option isn't specified, and you haven't set the X resource \fPname\fP, you
will be known by your \fIlogin name\fR.
.TP 15
.B -team \fIteam-number\fP
Joins team number \fBteam-number\fR.  See below for notes about
team play.  When the server is not configured for team mode, this
option has no effect.
.TP 15
.B -help
Prints a small usage message.
.TP 15
.B -version
Prints version information.
.TP 15
.B -join
Automatically joins the first server you get response from.
.TP 15
.B -list
Queries status information from all servers found.
.TP 15
.B -shutdown [\fImessage\fP]
Sends a shutdown to the server, the message part is optional.
.TP 15
.B -name \fInick\fP
Specifies your nick name.
.TP 15
.B -team \fInumber\fP
Specifies your wanted team number.
.TP 15
.B -display \fIdisplay-string\fP
Specifies which X server to contact.
.TP 15
.B -port \fInumber\fP
Specifies the port number of the server.
.TP 15
.B \fIserver-host\fP
Tries to connect to server at host \fIserver-host\fP.  The default is to
send a broadcast query on your attached network.


.SH PROMPT COMMANDS

When you startup \fBxpilot\fP without the \fB-join\fP option, you
will get a prompt asking you for directions.  You may type
.B h
or
.B ?
to list the available commands.  These are quite obvious and
deal with communication to the current server only.  You may
enter the game by pressing CR (Return/Enter).

If you are the owner of the server you will have a few extra
options.  See \fIxpilots(6)\fP.


.SH THE GRAPHICAL USER INTERFACE

When you enter a game you will hopefully be presented a window.
This window is divided into three major areas:
.RS 5
.TP 12
.B Radar
(Top left) This area shows the map the server you are playing on
is using as well as the position of your fellow players (if they
aren't cloaked).  In race mode the radar also outputs the
position of the control posts.
.TP 12
.B Rating list
(Bottom left) This area shows the list of players (sorted with
respect to their \fBrating\fP, or `score') currently logged on
the server.  The player with the highest <rating>/<num of times
died> ratio - that is, the most `deadly' player - is underlined
with a stipled line.

First on each line, you might find a letter which gives you some
information about the status of the player:
.B R
means the player is a robot,
.B T
means the player is not a player but a detached tank,
.B D
means player is dead (only possible in limited lives mode),
.B P
means the player is paused and
.B W
means the player is waiting to join the game after login
(in limited lives mode).

Depending on the current game mode, you will also find
information about which teams each player belong to and how many
lives each player has left.

.TP 12
.B Game area
(Right) This is where the action is.  Most notably you will see
your fighter in the middle of the screen, hopefully you won't see
any shots or explosions yet!

You may also see some strange blue drawings surrounding your fighter - this
is the \fBHUD\fP (Head Up Display) which greatly simplifies and compresses
the information you need to know.  Currently, the HUD displays the
following information:
.RS 5
.TP 12
.B Bonus items
You may notice some symbols and numbers on the left side of the HUD,
these indicate which, and what quantity, of extra equipment you have.
.TP 12
.B Fuel
A fuel meter will appear on the right side of the HUD when you
are getting low on fuel, it will start flashing when your fuel
level gets dangerously low.  The fuel is numerically displayed on
the bottom right corner of the HUD.
.TP 12
.B Lock
The name of the player you have currently locked on is shown on
the top of the HUD.  The distance and bearing to that same player
is visualized by a dot where placement of the dot gives the
direction, and the size of the dot gives the distance.  The dot
will be filled if the player is not on the same team as you.  The
distance to the player also numerically displayed on the top
right corner of the HUD, it is measured in `blocks'.
.TP 12
.B Velocity
(Optional) The position of the HUD changes with the current
velocity.  The distance from the center of your screen is
proportional to your velocity.  Moving to the top moves the HUD
to the bottom.

In addition to the moving HUD, you can display a line from the
center of the HUD to the center of your ship.

Both indicators can be combined or used exclusivly (see
discussion about \fBXresources\fP below).
.TP 12
.B Score messages
Relevant score information is shown below the HUD, as well as on
the game field.
.TP 12
.B Time left
The amount of time the game will last if the the server was started
with a time limit.  This is displayed in the upper left corner of
your HUD.

.RS -5
Between the \fBradar\fP and the \fBRating list\fP there are three
push buttons: 
.RS 5
.TP 12
.B Quit
Exits the game and the program.
.TP 12
.B About
Pressing the \fBAbout\fP button will popup a three page help window.
It explains in short the functionality of all the items
you may encounter together with a graphical depiction of them.
.TP 12
.B Menu
The \fBMenu\fP button pops up a pull down menu with the following
buttons:
.RS 5
.TP 12
.B Keys
Will popup the \fBKeys\fP window, which contains a list of
all the \fBX keysyms\fP that have one or more xpilot actions
bound to them.
.TP 12
.B Config
Changes the \fBRating list\fP into a window with a list
of most of the options.  The options can be changed interactively.
Pushing the \fBSave configuration\fP button will save the options
and the key bindings to the .xpilotrc file in your home directory.
.TP 12
.B Score
Displays the players and their scores in the \fBRating list\fP window.
.TP 12
.B Player
Lists the players with their login name and their host address
in the \fBRating list\fP window.
.RS -5
.RS -5


.SH GAME CONCEPTS

The game objective varies as the server (\fIxpilots(6)\fP) is
very configurable.  However, below you will find short
descriptions of some of the main concepts of the game.


.SS Gravity

All objects in the game are affected by gravity - that is, they
will accelerate in the direction the gravity is strongest.  The
strength of the gravity is user configurable (see
\fIxpilots(6)\fP), and can even be set to 0.

Some objects affect the gravity in a limited area, these are
called \fBgravs\fP and they exist in miscellaneous types
(attractive, repulsive, clockwise, anti-clockwise).  Gravs are
shown as red circles with some symbol inside which is different
for each type of grav.  (For more information on how the affect
they gravity, see \fIxpilots(6)\fP.)

.SS Wormholes

Wormholes are shown as red rotating circles.  They will
`teleport' you to another place in the world.  Generally, when
you go through a wormhole, you'll come out at the nearest
wormhole in the direction you were travelling.  Some wormholes
are enter-only and some are exit-only.  The exit-only ones are
invisible.  Passing through a wormhole will make you visible for
a while if you were cloaked.


.SS Fuel

You will also have to worry about your \fBfuel level\fP as most
equipment use fuel/energy and some even work better the more fuel
you have.

You may gain fuel by picking up special `fuel cans' (see
\fBbonus items\fP section) or by refueling at a refuel station.
Refuel stations may be found in blocks in the world, they differ
from standard background blocks in that they have a red/black
\fBF\fP in them, and they are partly or completely filled with
red.  The amount of red determines how much fuel the station has
available.  To refuel, you must hit the
\fIkeyRefuel\fP key (see \fBcontrols\fP section).

Fuel takes up mass and will also determine how big the explosion
will be when (sorry, `if' :) you meet your destiny. 


.SS Combat

There are two different and mutually exclusive modes which have
greatly different objectives: \fBcombat mode\fP and \fBrace
mode\fP.  The most extensive is the \fBcombat mode\fP, which also
happens to be the default.

Here your main objective is to get as high a rating as possible
by `blasting away' on enemy fighters (human or robot controlled)
and cannons.  All will naturally fire back at you, so you will
also need some nifty piloting skills and/or some heavy equipment
to really enjoy living.  Extra weapons are explained in the
\fBbonus items\fP section.


.SS Race

In \fBrace mode\fP, your objective is to fly as fast as you can
through a specified route.  This is done by passing checkpoints
in a specified order.  The finish is reached after three laps.

The next checkpoint is always visible on the radar.


.SS Team play

\fBTeam play\fP is useful in combination with \fBcombat mode\fP.
It is different from straight \fBcombat mode\fP in that players
on your own team are not considered enemies.  There are some
additional objectives too.

You can gain points if the map you are using have \fBtargets\fP
or \fBtreasures\fP.  The main difference is that you get points
by blowing up an enemy's target using shots or mines.
A shot will only damage a target and if the target is completely
damaged then the next shot will blow it up.  A mine will immediately
destroy a target.  Two missile hits will also destroy a target.

Enemy treasures have to be stolen from the enemies and dropped on
your own treasure.  You pick up a treasure by using \fIkeyConnector\fP
when flying nearby the enemies treasure.  This will attach
the treasure to your ship with a strong rubber band.
It is possible (in emergency situations :) to detach the enemy treasure
by pressing \fIkeyDropBall\fP, but this will of course not gain you or
your team any points.


.SS Shields

You may or may not have shields at your disposal, depending on
the server options specified.  If you have, they are activacted
with the \fIkeyShield\fP key (see \fBcontrols\fP section).
Generally collisions with other objects (except for debris and
sparks) are lethal, but when you are hit by something with your
shields up then it will only cost you some fuel/energy.
If you didn't have enough fuel then the collision will be lethal
again.  Having your shields up costs fuel.


.SS Bonus items

During the game you might encounter blue triangles with red
symbols on - these are special bonus items which will make your
life easier.  As of today, these items include:

.RS 5
.TP 12
.B Fuel can
More fuel/energy.
.TP 12
.B Cloaking device
Makes you invisible for other players, both on radar and on the screen.
However, when you are hit by a shot or missile or bounce with another
player then you will be temporarily visible again.
.TP 12
.B Sensors
Enables you to see cloakers to a limited extent.  Having more sensors
improves this.
.TP 12
.B Rear cannon
Extra rear cannon.
.TP 12
.B Front cannons
2 extra front cannons.
.TP 12
.B Afterburner
Your main engine becomes more powerful and uses your fuel more 
efficiently.
.TP 12
.B Rockets
Pack of rockets.  These may be used as smart missiles, heat
seaking missiles, nuclear missiles or just plain dumb torpedos.
.TP 12
.B Mine
Pack of mines.  Can be dropped as either moving mine (bombing) or
stationary mine (mining).
.TP 12
.B Tank
Additional fuel tank (perhaps with some spare fuel).  As you pick
up more tanks, your weight increases and you'll have to
compensate by picking up afterburners.  You can change which tank
is the `active tank', that is the one that fuel is drained from
(if this tank is empty, fuel is drained from all tanks).
Refueling is quicker with more tanks.

To ease filling several tanks in parallel, all the tanks drain
into their left neighbours (0<-1<-\|.\|.\|.<-8); except your
active tank, which is watertight (it seems a bit complicated at
first, but trust me, you'll get it eventually :-).  Tanks don't
drain if they reach a certain minimum level (unless of course,
you use it as the active tank).

When you detach a tank it is the active one that is detached,
unless the active tank happens to be your main tank, in which the
tank with the highest number is used.  The detached tank will
have the shape of a ship and will carry your name, it will
immediately start thrusting (as long as fuel permits) and will
fool all heat-seekers to follow it.
.TP 12
.B ECM
Electronic Counter Measures.  ECM allows you to confuse and
re-target smart missiles within a certain range of your ship.
When missiles are zapped by ECM, they will become confused for a
while and then have a high probability of going after the player
who you were locked onto when you used the ECM.  If another ship
is within range of the ECM, all it's sensors will freeze for a
while and the screen of that player will flash.
If the ship was cloaked, it will become visible for some moments.
The ECM is activated by pressing the \fIkeyECM\fP key.
.TP 12
.B Transporter
Enables you to steal equipment and energy/fuel from the closest
fighter, provided it is within the transporters range.  You
activate the transporter by pressing the \fIkeyTransporter\fP key.
.TP 12
.B Laser
Gives you a laser weapon with limited range.  Having more of these
increases the range.


.SH CONTROLS

The game understands quite some keys, but not all of them are
equally important.  The following keys are more or less sorted by
importance.  The name of the keys are also the Xresources you use
to redefine them, and the words inside the curly braces {} are
their default bindings.  See \fBXresources\fP section below.
.RS 2
.TP 4
\fIPrimary keys\fP
The primary keys are:
.RS 5
.TP 12
.B keyTurnLeft {a}
Turn left (anti-clockwise).
.TP 12
.B keyTurnRight {s}
Turn right (clockwise).
.TP 12
.B keyThrust {right shift or left shift}
Thrust me.
.TP 12
.B keyFireShot {return or linefeed}
Fire normal shot.
.TP 12
.B keyShield {space or right meta}
Raise shield.  Must be held down for continuous use.
.TP 12
.B keyRefuel {f or ctrl or caps lock}
Try to connect to nearest fuel station.  Must be held down during refueling.
.RS -5
.TP 4
\fISecondary keys\fP
The following commands are not always available, some require bonus items
to have any functionality at all.
.RS 5
.TP 12
.B keySelfDestruct {q}
Self destruct.  At last we managed to include a timer, got rid of all those
nasty I'd-rather-die-by-my-own-hands-than-let-you-kill-me-and-get-all-
the-points pilots.
.TP 12
.B keyIdMode {i}
Toggle the ID mode.  Instead of the score list it will display the list
of players with their real names and computer addresses.
.TP 12
.B keyCloak {BackSpace or Delete}
Enable/disable cloaking device if available.  You will be invisible on both
radar and on screen, but beware - the device is not foolproof, it is
not cheap on your fuel and the only thing becoming invisible is your ship,
i.e. the exhaust-flames will still be visible.
.TP 12
.B keySwapSettings {Esc}
Toggle between two different settings.  You'll probably want more power
and a larger turn rate in combat than when you're doing some critical
maneuvering.
.TP 12
.B keyDropMine {Tab}
Drop a proximity mine.  The mine will detonate after a certain amount of
time (quite large actually) or when a foe comes too near.
.TP 12
.B keyDetachMine {]}
Drop a moving mine - that is, a bomb.
.TP 12
.B keyEcm {[}
Fire an ECM pulse.
.TP 12
.B keyChangeHome {Home or h}
Change home base.  You will need to be landed on the base of your choice.
(The \fBHome\fP key is located just right of the \fBReturn\fP key on most
HP-keyboards.)  These keys are convenient for HP keyboards, also somewhat
adapted to SUN keyboards.
.TP 12
.B keyTankNext {w}
If you have additional tanks, the current tank will be the next tank.
.TP 12
.B keyTankPrev {e}
If you have additional tanks, the current tank will be the previous tank.
.TP 12
.B keyTankDetach {r}
Detach the current tank (or the last additional tank).
Heat-seeking missiles will hopefully follow this tank.
.TP 12
.B keyPause {p or Pause}
Parking mode - you can only park while you're landed on your own
home base, and when you park, you cannot rejoin the game until
the P has stopped blinking (to prevent users from using this
option to run away from a battle).
.TP 12
.B keyFireMissile {backslash}
Fire smart missile if available.  The missile will home onto the player
that you have currently locked on.  You must have \fBa clear lock\fP on a
player for this to work.  Requires lock.
.TP 12
.B keyFireHeat {;}
Fire a thrust controlled missile. Works like a smart missle, but
is faster and ECM isn't able to confuse it. Needs the thrust for
navigating.
.TP 12
.B keyFireTorpedo {'}
Fire a missile without flight control. It runs very fast in shot
direction.
.TP 12
.B keyFireNuke {n}
Fire a nuclear missile without flight control.  It runs very fast
in shot direction.
.B keyFireLaser {slash}
Activate the laser beam.
.TP 12
.B keyLockClose {Select}
Will lock onto the closest player if he/she is within range.
.TP 12
.B keyLockNext {Next}
Will, if possible, lock onto the next player in the game.
.TP 12
.B keyLockPrev {Prior}
Will, if possible, lock onto the previous player in the game.
.TP 12
.B keyConnector {left ctrl}
Use connector (for the moment, all this is used for is picking up
treasures/balls).
.TP 12
.B keyDropBall {d}
Drop the ball if you are carrying it.

.TP 0
These keys let you adjust the control sensitivity:
.TP 12
.B keyIncreasePower {*}
Increase engine power.
.TP 12
.B keyDecreasePower {/}
Decrease engine power.
.TP 12
.B keyIncreaseTurnspeed {+}
Increase turn speed.
.TP 12
.B keyDecreaseTurnspeed {-}
Decrease turn speed.

.TP 0
And:
.TP 12
.B keyTalk {m}
Toggles the talk window.  It is a small and wide window below the middle
of the game window.  If you move the mouse pointer into it then you can
type a message which will be send to all players in this game.
Pressing escape while typing cancels the message.  Pressing return
will send it.


.SH X RESOURCES

At startup xpilot will look for X resources in several places.
First it looks in the LIBDIR (as defined during compilation,
mostly as something like /usr/local/games/xpilot/lib/)
for the file named XPilot.
After that it looks for more resources in
/usr/lib/X11/$LANG/app-defaults/XPilot,
$XUSERFILESEARCHPATH/XPilot,
$XAPPLRESDIR/$LANG/XPilot,
$HOME/app-defaults/$LANG/XPilot,
resources set using xrdb or else $HOME/.Xdefaults,
host specific resources in the file pointed to by $XENVIRONMENT
or else in $HOME/.Xdefaults-hostname
and finally in $HOME/.xpilotrc.
If the LANG environment variable is undefined or if that file doesn't
exist then it will look for the file as if LANG had been undefined.
Resources defined in files listed later will override resources in
files listed earlier.  All of these resources can be overridden by
their corresponding command line arguments.

The following resources are understood:
.RS 5
.TP 12
.B name
Your nick name.
.TP 12
.B team
Preferred team number.
.TP 12
.B power
Primary power setting of your engine.  Primary in this context means that it
is part of the default setting, secondary means the other setting (two
different settings are available, pressing \fBEsc\fP will switch between
them).  You may change "sensitivity" of your ship by adjusting these
parameters.  Often you would like one setting to be more "rough" than the
other - one setting for fine maneuvering and one for racing. (Default 45.0)
.TP 12
.B turnSpeed
Primary turnspeed setting of your ship. (Default 30.0)
.TP 12
.B turnResistance
Primary turnresistance setting of your ship.  This value determines how
fast your ship will stop rotating, i.e. the rotating speed of your ship is
set equal to itself multiplied by this value.  Obviously the value has to
lie between 0.0 (exclusive) and 1.0 (inclusive).  (Default 0.12)
.TP 12
.B altPower
Secondary power setting of your engine. (Default 35.0)
.TP 12
.B altTurnSpeed
Secondary turnspeed setting of your ship. (Default 25.0)
.TP 12
.B altTurnResistance
Secondary turnresistance setting of your ship. (Default 0.12)
.TP 12
.B fuelNotify
The limit when the HUD fuel bar will become visible. (Default 500.0)
.TP 12
.B fuelWarning
The limit when the HUD fuel bar will start flashing. (Default 200.0)
.TP 12
.B fuelCritical
The limit when the HUD fuel bar will flash faster. (Default 100.0)
.TP 12
.B showHUD
Should the HUD be on or off. (Default true)
.TP 12
.B verticalHUDLine
Should the vertical lines in the HUD be drawn. (Default false)
.TP 12
.B horizontalHUDLine
Should the horizontal lines in the HUD be drawn. (Default true)
.TP 12
.B speedFactHUD
Should the HUD me moved, to indicate the current velocity. Negativ values will
inverse the moving of the HUD. (Default 0.0)
.TP 12
.B speedFactPTR
Uses a red line to indicate the current velocity. On edge of the line is the
center of the ship. The other end is moved in the same way, as the HUD, if
speedFactPTR is set.
.TP 12
.B charsPerSecond
This determines the speed in which messages are written, in characters
per second.
.TP 12
.B markingLights
Should the fighters have marking lights, just like airplanes?
.TP 12
.B clock
Display a small digital clock.
.TP 12
.B toggleShield
Have the shield status be changed only by a key press and ignore the
key release.
.TP 12
.B fuelMeter
Determines if the fuel meter should be visible. This meter visualizes your
fuel level in a different way than \fBfuelGauge\fP does.
.TP 12
.B fuelGauge
Determines if the fuel gauge should be visible. See \fBfuelMeter\fP.
.TP 12
.B turnSpeedMeter
Should the turnspeed meter be visible at all times. (Default false)
.TP 12
.B powerMeter
Should the power meter be visible at all times. (Default false)
.TP 12
.B backgroundPointDist
Specifies the block distance between points drawn in the background,
used in empty map regions.  8 is default, 0 means no points.
.TP 12
.B backgroundPointSize
Specifies the size of the background points.  The default is 2,
0 means no points.
.TP 12
.B slidingRadar
If the game is in edgewrap mode (see \fIxpilots(6)\fP) then the
radar will keep your position on the radar in the center and
draw the rest of the radar around it.  This requires very
good X performance and a pretty fast workstation.  Default is off.
.TP 12
.B outlineWorld
Draws only the outline of all the blue map constructs.
.TP 12
.B packetSizeMeter
Turns on a meter displaying the maximum packet size of the last few seconds.
.TP 12
.B packetLostMeter
Turns on a meter displaying the percentage of packets lost in the last second
due to network failure (overload).
.TP 12
.B packetDropMeter
Turns on a meter displaying the percentage of packets dropped due to your
display not being able to keep up with the rate at which the server is
generating frame updates.  If possible lower the frame update rate of
the server with the -fps option.
.TP 12
.B receiveWindowSize
Specifies how big the receive window should be.  See
\fBNOTES\fP below.
.TP 12
.B sounds
Specifies the sound file.  (Only if sound is enabled.)
.TP 12
.B maxVolume
Specifies the volume to play sounds with, where 0 turns off
sound.  (Only if sound is enabled.)
.TP 12
.B audioServer
Specifies the audio server to use.  (Only if sound is enabled.)
.TP 12
.B geometry
Specifies the geometry to use like: -geometry 1280x1024+0+0.
.TP 12
.B visual
Specifies which visual to use.  You can see which visuals your
display supports by running: xpilot -visual list.
.TP 12
.B mono
Turns on mono display type.
.TP 12
.B colorSwitch <true/false>
Tells xpilot to use a color switching display technique or not.
Default is true if your display hardware has enough colors available.
.TP 12
.B maxColors
Tells xpilot how many colors you want it to use.
Default is 8, with a maximum of 16.  If your display seems slow then
try: xpilot -maxColors 4.
.TP 12
.B gameFont
The font used on the HUD and for nearly all text part of the game
field.
.TP 12
.B messageFont
The font used for messages displayed in the bottom left corner of
the game field.
.TP 12
.B scoreListFont
The font used on the score list.  Must be non-proportional.
.TP 12
.B buttonFont
The font used on all buttons.
.TP 12
.B textFont
The font used in the help and about windows.
.TP 12
.B black
Specifies the color to use for black.  Default is #000000 which is equivalent
to specifying Black.
.TP 12
.B white
Specifies the color to use for white.  Default is #FFFFFF which is equivalent
to specifying White.
.TP 12
.B blue
Specifies the color to use for blue.
.TP 12
.B red
Specifies the color to use for red.
.B color0
Specifies the color to use for color 0.  You can specify colors
up to color15 this way.  Black, white, blue and red are equivalent to
color0, color1, color2 and color3 respectively.
.RS -5


.SH INVOCATION EXAMPLES

The simplest invocation of the hand-shake program is to just type:
.IP
.B xpilot
.PP

This will force the program to search after a server on all the
machines on your attached network.

Say you know where the server is, and you don't want to be
prompted (handy in scripts etc.), you may type for example:
.IP
.B xpilot -join lglab08

where lglab08 is the name of the host running the server.
.PP
In the examples above your name would be your \fBlogin name\fP.
Let's say you want to be really cool and your login name is
.B gudmari,
well - you're in loads of trouble if you don't know about the
.B -name
option;
.IP
.B xpilot -name FireEater
.PP
will fix the problem for you.


.SH NOTES

For credit list, see the provided CREDITS file.


If the client crashes, you will be without autorepeat on your
keyboard.  To re-enable autorepeat, issue this command:
.IP
.B xset r
.PP
Please also note that xpilot can be addictive, and strenous
for both you and your keyboard.  We take no responsibility. :)


There is a \fBmeta server\fP running on \fBxpilot.cs.uit.no\fP,
port \fB4400\fP, into which all servers registers.  This way you
can easily check if there are any servers running nearby.  To use
it, try:
.IP
.B telnet xpilot.cs.uit.no 4400
.B help
.B list
.PP

Or:
.IP
.B telnet xpilot.cs.uit.no 4401
.PP

If you experience any problems with `jerkiness', you should try
to adjust the \fIreceiveWindowSize\fP Xresource.  The problem may
be that your X server can't display as fast as the XPilot server
is generating new frame updates.  So another option is setting
the number of frames for the server to a lower number or get a
faster X display system :)

The \fIreceiveWindowSize\fP resource allows you to tune the
buffering of frame updates a little.  When set to one then there
is no buffering and \fBxpilot\fP will just read the next frame
and display it.  When the display is slower than the XPilot
server this may give all sorts of problems like lagging behind
and lack of keyboard control.

When you set \fIreceiveWindowSize\fP to two then \fBxpilot\fP
will always try to read a second frame from the network and if
this succeeds it will discard the oldest frame.  A better number
for \fIreceiveWindowSize\fP is three which will discard the
oldest frame out of three and therefore be less subject to small
changes in network delivery times.  If your display is fast enough
and can keep up with rate at which the server is generating frames
then specifying a value bigger than one will not result in dropping
frames, but rather will it be a buffer for small changes in network
performance and computer load.  The maximum value of
\fIreceiveWindowSize\fP is four.


.SH AUTHORS

\fBXPilot\fP was developed by
Bjoern Stabell (bjoerns@staff.cs.uit.no) and
Ken Ronny Schouten (kenrsc@stud.cs.uit.no) from the University of Tromsoe, and
Bert Gijsbers (bert@mc.bio.uva.nl) from the University of Amsterdam.


.SH BUG REPORTS

The product is seemingly stable, so bug reports are highly
appreciated.  Send email to \fBxpilot@cs.uit.no\fP and we will
see what we can do.  We merely ask that you remember to include
the following information:
.IP
.PD 0
.RS 4
\(bu The platforms the bug occurs on
.TP
\(bu What kind of display you have (depth, color, type)
.TP
\(bu Which resources you're using.
.TP
\(bu The full version of XPilot (e.g. 3.0.9)
.TP
\(bu What the bug looks like (symptoms)
.TP
\(bu When the bug usually occurs
.PP
.PD
.IP
.RS -4
We would also like to receive changes you do to make the code
compile on your machine (we would NOT like to receive the whole
program translated to K&R C, keep it ANSI :) If you don't have an
ANSI compiler, there are several utilities which may help you
de-ANSI-fy the code (unproto, unprotoize etc), but a better solution
will be to install the GNU C compiler on your system.


.SH COPYRIGHT & DISCLAIMER

XPilot is copyright (C) 1991-93 by the authors mentioned above.
XPilot comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY; for details see the
provided LICENSE file.


.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 40
.B /usr/local/games/lib/xpilot/motd
Message of the day.
.TP
.B /usr/local/games/lib/xpilot/sounds
File containing the sound to sound-file mapping.
.TP
.B /usr/local/games/lib/xpilot/maps/
Directory containing maps.
.PD

.SH SEE ALSO
xpilots(6)
.\"
.\" index		\fIxpilot\fP \- multiplayer war game
.\" index		\fIxpilots\fP \- server module for xpilot
