.\" =()<.ds a @<NEWSARTS>@>()=
.ds a /usr/spool/news
.\" =()<.ds b @<NEWSBIN>@>()=
.ds b /usr/lib/newsbin
.\" =()<.ds c @<NEWSCTL>@>()=
.ds c /usr/lib/news
.\" =()<.ds m @<NEWSMASTER>@>()=
.ds m usenet
.TH EXPIRE 8 "13 April 1992"
.BY "C News"
.SH NAME
expire, doexpire, expireiflow \- expire old news
.br
mkhistory \- rebuild news history file
.br
upact \- update news active file
.br
recovact \- partially recover news active file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B \*b/expire/expire
[
.B \-a
archdir
] [
.B \-p
] [
.B \-s
] [
.B \-F
c
] [
.B \-c
] [
.B \-n
nnnnn
] [
.B \-t
] [
.B \-l
] [
.B \-v
] [
.B \-d
] [
.B \-r
] [
.B \-g
] [
.B \-h
]
[ controlfile ]
.br
.B \*b/expire/doexpire
expireoptions
.br
.B \*b/expire/expireiflow
minimum
expireoptions
.br
.B \*b/expire/mkhistory
[
.B \-s
sizemultiplier ]
.br
.B \*b/expire/upact
.br
.B \*b/expire/recovact
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Expire
expires old news, removing it from the current-news directories and
(if asked to) archiving it elsewhere.
It updates news's
.I history
file to match.
.I Expire
should normally be run nightly, typically by using \fIdoexpire\fR (see below).
.PP
.IR Expire 's
operations are controlled by a control file
(which can be named or supplied on standard input),
which is not optional\(emthere is no default behavior.
Each line of the control file
(except for empty lines and lines starting with `#', which are ignored)
should have four white-space-separated
fields, as follows.
.PP
The first field is
a newsgroup pattern list
(containing no spaces!);
partial specifications are acceptable (e.g. `comp' specifies all groups
with that prefix).
See
.IR newssys (5)
for full details.
.PP
The second field is one letter, `m', `u', or `x', specifying that the line
applies only to moderated groups, only to unmoderated groups, or to both,
respectively.
.PP
The third field specifies the expiry period in days.
The most general form is three numbers separated by dashes.
The units are days, decimal fractions are permitted,
and ``never'' is shorthand for an extremely large number.
The first number gives the retention period:
how long must pass after an article's arrival before it is a candidate
for expiry.
The third number gives the purge period:
how long must pass after arrival
before the article will be expired unconditionally.
The middle number gives the expiry period:
how long after an article's arrival it is expired by default.
An explicit expiry date in the article will override the expiry
period but not the retention period or the purge period.
If the field contains only two numbers with a dash separating them,
the retention period defaults to 0.
If the field contains only a number, the retention period defaults to 0
and the purge period defaults to `never'.
(But see below.)
The retention period must be less than the purge period, and the expiry period
must lie between them.
.PP
The fourth field is an archiving directory,
or `@' which indicates that the default archiving directory (see \fB\-a\fR)
should be used,
or `\-' which suppresses archiving.
An explicit archiving directory (not `@') prefixed with `=' means
that articles should be archived into that directory itself;
normally they go into subdirectories under it by newsgroup name,
as in the current-news directory tree.
(E.g., article 123 of comp.pc.drivel being archived into archive directory
\fI/exp\fR would normally become \fI/exp/comp/pc/drivel/123\fR,
but if the archiving
directory was given as `=/exp' rather than `/exp', it would become
\fI/exp/123\fR.)
.I Expire
creates subdirectories under an archiving directory automatically,
but will not create the archiving directory itself.
Archiving directories must be given as full pathnames.
.PP
The first line of the control file which applies to a given article is
used to control its expiry.
It is an error for no line to apply;
the last line should be something like `all\ x\ 7\ \-'
to ensure that at least one line is always applicable.
Cross-posted articles are treated as if they were independently posted
to each group.
.PP
The retention and purge defaults can be overridden by including a
\fIbounds\fR line,
one with the special first field \fB/bounds/\fR.
The retention and purge defaults for following lines will be those of
the bounds line.
The defaults ``stretch'' as necessary to
ensure that the purge period is never less than the expiry period
and the retention period is never greater than the expiry period.
The other fields of a bounds line are ignored but must be present.
.PP
Entries in the \fIhistory\fR file can be retained after article expiry,
to stop a late-arriving copy of the article from being taken as a new article.
To arrange this, include a line with the special first field \fB/expired/\fR;
this line then controls the expiry of \fIhistory\fR lines after the
corresponding articles expire.
Dates are still measured from article arrival, not expiry.
The other fields of such a line are ignored but must be present.
It is strongly recommended that such a line be included, and that it
specify as long a time as practical.
.PP
Command-line options are:
.TP 10
.BR \-a " dir"
\fIdir\fR is the default archiving directory;
if no default is given, the control file may not contain
any `@' archive-directory fields.
.TP
.B \-p
print an `index' line for each archived article,
containing its pathname, message ID, date received, and `Subject:' line.
.TP
.B \-s
space is tight; optimize error recovery to minimize space consumed rather
than to leave as much evidence as possible.
.TP
.BR \-F " c"
the subfield separator character
in the middle \fIhistory\fR field is \fIc\fR rather
than the normal `~'.
.TP
.B \-c
check the format and consistency of the control file and the \fIactive\fR
file, but do not do any expiring.
.TP
.BR \-n " nnnnn"
set \fIexpire\fR's idea of the time to \fInnnnn\fR (for testing).
.TP
.BR \-t
print (on standard error) a shell-script-like description of what would
be done, but don't do it.
In the absence of archiving, all output lines will be of the form
``\fBremove\fR\ \fIname\fR'', where \fIname\fR is a pathname relative
to \fI\*a\fR.
If an article is to be archived, this will be preceded (on the same
line) by ``\fBcopy\fR\ \fIname\fR\ \fIdir\fR\ \fB;\fR\ '', where \fIname\fR
is as in \fBremove\fR and \fIdir\fR is an archiving directory
(including any `=' prefix)
as specified by the control file
or the \fB\-a\fR option.
.TP
.BR \-l
consider first filename in a \fIhistory\fR line to be the \fIleader\fR of
its line, to be expired only after all others have expired.
(Meant for use on obnoxious systems like VMS which don't support real links.)
.TP
.BR \-r
suppress \fIhistory\fR rebuild.
Mostly for emergencies.
(This leaves the \fIhistory\fR file out of date and larger than necessary,
but improves speed and eliminates the need for several megabytes of
temporary storage.)
.TP
.BR \-h
do not expire any article which would be archived if it were expired.
Mostly for emergencies, so that \fIexpire\fR can be run
(to delete articles in non-archived groups)
even if space is short in archiving areas.
.TP
.BR \-v
verbose:
report some statistics after termination.
.TP
.BR \-g
report expiry dates that \fIgetdate\fR(3) does not like.
.I Expire
ignores such dates, treating the article as if it had no explicit
expiry date.
.TP
.BR \-d
turn on (voluminous and cryptic) debugging output.
.PP
.I Expire
considers the middle field of a \fIhistory\fR line to consist of one or
more subfields separated by `~'.
The first is the arrival date, which can be either a \fIgetdate\fR(3)-readable
date or a decimal seconds count;
\fIexpire\fR leaves this field unchanged.
The second\(emif present, non-null, and not `\-'\(emis an explicit expiry
date for the file, again in either format, which \fIexpire\fR will convert
to a decimal seconds count as it regenerates the \fIhistory\fR file.
Subsequent fields are preserved but ignored.
.PP
.I Doexpire
checks whether another \fIdoexpire\fR is running,
checks that there is enough disk space,
invokes \fIexpire\fR with any \fIexpireoptions\fR given and with
\fI\*c/explist\fR as the control file,
and reports any difficulties by sending mail to \fI\*m\fR.
This is usually better than just running \fIexpire\fR directly.
If space is not adequate for archiving, \fIdoexpire\fR reports this
and invokes \fIexpire\fR with the \fB\-h\fR option.
If \fB\-r\fR is not among the \fIexpireoptions\fR,
and disk space is persistently inadequate for the
temporaries needed for history rebuilding, \fIdoexpire\fR reports this
and invokes \fIexpire\fR with the \fB\-r\fR option anyway.
.PP
.I Expireiflow
checks whether there are at least \fIminimum\fR megabytes available for
articles,
and invokes \fIdoexpire\fR with
.B \-r
and the \fIexpireoptions\fR (if any) if not.
This may be useful on systems which run close to the edge on disk space.
.PP
.I Mkhistory
rebuilds the \fIhistory\fR file and its auxiliaries to match the articles
in \fI\*a\fR.
Normally
.I mkhistory
uses a reasonable default size for the
.IR dbz (3z)
index database; if the
.B \-s
option is given, the expected number of entries in the history database
is taken to be the number of articles found in \fI\*a\fR times
.IR sizemultiplier .
.PP
.I Upact
updates the third fields of the \fIactive\fR file to match the articles
in \fI\*a\fR (for historical reasons, \fIexpire\fR does not do this).
.I Recovact
updates the second fields of the \fIactive\fR file to match the articles
in \fI\*a\fR,
for use in disaster recovery based on an outdated \fIactive\fR file
or initialization of a news system based on someone else's \fIactive\fR.
.PP
.IR Mkhistory ,
.IR upact ,
and
.IR recovact
are all fairly slow and they all lock the whole news
system for the duration of the run, so they should not be run casually.
.SH FILES
.ta 6c
.nf
\*c/history	history file
\*c/history.pag	\fIdbm\fR database for history file
\*c/history.dir	\fIdbm\fR database for history file
\*c/explist	expiry control file
\*c/history.o	history file as of last expiry
\*c/history.n*	new history file and \fIdbm\fR files abuilding
\*c/LOCKexpire	\fIdoexpire\fR's lock file
\*b/expire/*	various auxiliaries
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR inews (1),
.IR dbm (3),
.IR newssys (5),
.IR relaynews (8)
.SH HISTORY
Written at U of Toronto by Henry Spencer, with contributions by Geoff Collyer.
.SH BUGS
Archiving is always done by copying, never by linking.
This has the side effect that cross-posted articles are archived as
several independent copies.
.PP
The
.B \-p
subject-finder botches continued header lines,
as does \fImkhistory\fR,
although such lines are rare.
.PP
\fIUpact\fR is a distasteful kludge,
but then, so is the third field of the \fIactive\fR file.
.PP
\fIUpact\fR forces the third field of the \fIactive\fR file to be at least
five digits, for backward compatibility, but otherwise just makes it as
large as necessary.
The group-creation operations always create it ten digits long.
The discrepancy is harmless, since unlike the second field, the third
field is never updated in place.
.PP
One cannot put more than one newsgroup into a single archiving directory
with the `=' feature, since the article numbers will collide with each
other and expire doesn't do anything about this.
Note that archiving a newsgroup which has subgroups into
an `=' directory puts all the subgroups in the same directory as the parent!
(Specifying the group as `foo.bar,!foo.bar.all' will avoid this.)
.PP
.I Mkhistory
is inherently incapable of reconstructing history-file lines corresponding
to expired articles.
Protection against old articles reappearing is thus somewhat limited for
a while after the history file is rebuilt.
.PP
.I Expire
uses
.IR access (2)
to test for the presence of archiving directories,
which can cause anomalies if it is run setuid (normally it's not).
