.\" =()<.ds a @<NEWSARTS>@>()=
.ds a /usr/spool/news
.\" =()<.ds b @<NEWSBIN>@>()=
.ds b /usr/lib/newsbin
.\" =()<.ds c @<NEWSCTL>@>()=
.ds c /usr/lib/news
.\" =()<.ds m @<NEWSMASTER>@>()=
.ds m usenet
.TH INJNEWS 1 "20 September 1991"
.BY "C News"
.SH NAME
injnews, inews \- `user-friendly' news-posting front-ends for relaynews
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B injnews
[
.B \-N
]
[
.B \-A
]
[
.B \-V
]
[
.B \-x
excluded-site
]
.br
.in +0.25i
.ti -0.25i
.B inews
[
.B \-h
]
[
.B \-N
]
[
.B \-A
]
[
.B \-V
]
[
.B \-x
excluded-site
]
[
.B \-W
]
.\" silly B options follow
[
.B \-M
]
[
.B \-a
Approved:-contents
]
[
.B \-c
Control:-contents
]
[
.B \-d
Distribution:-contents
]
[
.B \-e
Expires:-contents
]
[
.B \-f
From:-contents
]
[
.B \-n
Newsgroups:-contents
]
[
.B \-o
Organization:-contents
]
[
.B \-r
Reply-To:-contents
]
[
.B \-t
Subject:-contents
]
[
.B \-C
newsgroup
]
[
.B \-F
References:-contents
]
[
file ...
]
.br
.in -0.25i
.B inews
.B \-p
[ file ... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Injnews
and
.I inews
massage news articles to make them conform
to DARPA RFC 1036,
then
.IR i nject
them into the
.I news
flow.
.I Injnews
is the preferred interface.
.I Inews
is slower but handles all the old B News options,
primarily for the benefit of old news readers.
.PP
.I Injnews
injects an article,
found on standard input,
into the news flow,
installing it locally
and
broadcasting it (if appropriate) onto the network.
.I Injnews
assumes the presence of at least
.B Subject:
and
.B Newsgroups:
headers in the article,
then adds and alters headers,
notably
.BR Message-ID: ,
.BR From:
and
.BR Path: ,
deletes invisible characters,
and
appends the first four lines of
.BR $HOME/.signature ,
if any,
to the article,
and hands the resulting article to
.IR relaynews (8),
provided the newsgroup(s) are unmoderated.
If any of the groups are moderated,
the article will instead be mailed
to the moderator of one of the moderated newsgroups in the
.B Newsgroups:
header.
.B \-N
suppresses posting
and
produces on standard output
the article that would have otherwise been posted;
the resultant article will have been checked for illegalities as usual
and will be suitable as input to
.IR relaynews (8).
.B \-A
waits until enough space becomes free in
.BR \*a .
.B \-V
causes
.I relaynews
to emit a log file line on stdout
after processing is complete,
by having
.I relaynews
not redirect stdout and stderr
to
.B \*c/log
and
.B \*c/errlog.
.B \-x
prevents transmission to site
.IR excluded-site .
.PP
.I Inews
does everything that
.I injnews
does,
plus some backwardly-compatible things.
The article is read from
.IR file s
or standard input if none.
Normal usage is
.BR "inews \-h" ,
which assumes that the input article starts with headers;
otherwise it starts the article body
and the B News options described below must be given
to supply the headers.
.B \-W
waits for
.I relaynews
to complete,
instead of running it in the background and not waiting.
.B \-M
does nothing,
for B News compatibility.
The rest of the options are inherited from B News
and exist only for backward-compatibility with news readers.
.I "They should not be used by humans,"
as they are equivalent to
adding the obvious headers,
with two small twists:
.B \-f
generates
.BI "From:" " From:-contents"
which generates a
.BI "Sender:" " user" @ "host"
header
if there is no
.B Sender:
header in the input,
and
.B \-C
tells you to use
.I addgroup
for local group creations
and tells you what to feed to
.I injnews
for global ones.
.PP
.B "inews \-p"
.I files
is exactly equivalent to invoking
.BI "relaynews \-r " files\c
,
where
.I files
may be an empty list;
there is no automatic recovery of the input
file(s) in case of errors,
full disks
or other problems.
.SH EXAMPLES
.B "injnews <article"
.in +0.5i
Post
.I article
to Usenet.
.in -0.5i
.PP
.B "injnews \-N <article >/dev/null"
.in +0.5i
Check
.I article
for obvious errors.
.in -0.5i
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 2i
.B \*c/active
contains (un)moderated flag
.TP
.B \*c/mailpaths
routes to moderators, Internet gateway
.TP
.B \*c/mailname
the name of this cluster of machines for purposes of mail,
including any domain
.TP
.B \*c/server
the hostname of this cluster's server
.TP
.B \*c/whoami
the name of this cluster for purposes of news
.TP
.IB $HOME /.signature
your name and network addresses
(no line-printer graphics, please)
.TP
.IB $HOME /dead.article
saved article in case of errors or problems
.TP
.BR /tmp/in *
temporaries
.PD
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR mail (1),
.IR news (5),
.IR newsaux (8),
.IR relaynews (8)
.br
DARPA RFC 1036
.SH HISTORY
Written by Geoff Collyer
as part of the C news project.
.SH BUGS
.I Inews
should be unnecessary;
its only useful function is adding
.B Message-ID:
headers
and
most novices use
.IR Pnews ,
which could invoke
.I relaynews
directly.
.PP
.I Inews
is a shell script currently
and can fail if any of the underlying Unix tools fail.
This typically happens with very long input lines.
