.\" =()<.ds a @<NEWSARTS>@>()=
.ds a /usr/spool/news
.\" =()<.ds b @<NEWSBIN>@>()=
.ds b /usr/lib/newsbin
.\" =()<.ds c @<NEWSCTL>@>()=
.ds c /usr/lib/news
.\" =()<.ds m @<NEWSMASTER>@>()=
.ds m usenet
.TH NEWSMAINT 8 "13 April 1992"
.BY "C News"
.SH NAME
newshist \- extract history line for news article(s)
.br
newsdaily \- maintain news log files and report problems
.br
newswatch \- keep an eye on news system for difficulties
.br
newsboot \- clean up news debris on reboot
.br
locknews \- lock news system
.br
addgroup, delgroup \- add and delete newsgroups, locally only
.br
adddirs \- make any missing directories for active newsgroups
.br
addfeed \- add a news feed
.br
act.to.times \- create active.times file for news readers
.br
histfrom, newsfrom \- list news arriving over specific time range
.br
addmissing \- add missing news articles to history file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B \*b/maint/newshist
msgid ...
.br
.B \*b/maint/newsdaily
[ guru ... ]
.br
.B \*b/maint/newswatch
[ spacemin [ inbatchmax ] ]
.br
.B \*b/maint/newsboot
.br
.B \*b/maint/locknews
[
.B \-v
]
.br
.B \*b/maint/addgroup
group {\fBy\fR|\fBn\fR|\fBm\fR|\fBx\fR|\fB=\fIrealgroup\fR}
.br
.B \*b/maint/delgroup
group
.br
.B \*b/maint/adddirs
.br
.B \*b/maint/addfeed
[
.B \-L
]
[
.B \-f
flags ]
site groups
.br
.B \*b/maint/act.to.times
activefile
.br
.B \*b/maint/histfrom
startdate [ enddate ]
.br
.B \*b/maint/newsfrom
startdate [ enddate ]
.br
.B \*b/maint/addmissing
[
.B \-d
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
These programs are utilities useful in maintaining a C News
system and diagnosing problems in it.
.PP
.I Newshist
prints the history line for each article identified by a \fImsgid\fR.
.PP
.I Newsdaily
performs minor maintenance chores
that typically should be done once a day for the news system:
saving copies of log files and truncating them,
reporting logged errors, checking for anomalies suggesting something
is wrong, and cleaning out leftover files.
\fINewsdaily\fR saves one generation of old \fIlog\fR files and three
generations of old \fIerrlog\fR and \fIbatchlog\fR files.
It reports problems to the named \fIguru\fRs
(default:  `\*m').
.PP
.I Newswatch
looks for indications of news problems on a shorter time scale than those
reported by \fInewsdaily\fR, notably strangely-persistent lock files that
may indicate a news-system failure.
If
.I spacemin
is specified,
.I newswatch
checks the
.IR incoming ,
.IR articles ,
.IR control ,
and
.I outbound
areas to confirm that there are still at least
.I spacemin
bytes available in each, and reports it if not.
If
.I inbatchmax
is specified,
.I newswatch
inspects the incoming-news spooling area and reports if more than
.I inbatchmax
files are awaiting processing.
.I Newswatch
delivers its report, if any, on standard output;
an empty report (zero bytes of output) means no problems.
It typically should be run a few times a day with any
non-empty output mailed to someone suitable.
.PP
.I Newsboot
should be run from \fI/etc/rc\fR or the system's equivalent on reboot.
It cleans up files that the news system might have left lying about
if the system crashed while news was being processed,
notably old lock files.
.PP
.I Locknews
locks the news system
(retrying until it succeeds),
starts up a shell
(\c
.B $SHELL
if set,
otherwise the system's standard shell)
with the
.B PS1
and
.B prompt
environment variables prepended with executable reminders,
and waits around to
unlock the news system when that shell terminates.
This simplifies manual maintenance.
.B \-v
produces messages on standard error
upon successful locking and unlocking;
this is only needed by users of shells that import
neither
.B PS1
nor
.B prompt
to set their prompts,
notably C shells.
.PP
.I Addgroup
and
.I delgroup
respectively add a newsgroup (with a specified flags field for the
\fIactive\fR file, normally `y' [see \fInews\fR(5)]) and delete a
newsgroup manually, with proper locking.
The effect is purely local; no control message (to propagate the
change to other machines) is sent.
.PP
.I Adddirs
sweeps through the \fIactive\fR file checking that directories exist for
all newsgroups.
(\fIRelaynews\fR
will create directories as needed, but some
user-interface software gets upset if a newsgroup exists but its directory
does not.)
This is mostly useful when adding groups in bulk, based on another site's
\fIactive\fR file.
.PP
.I Addfeed
adds a line to the \fIsys\fR file specifying that the \fIsite\fR should
be fed the \fIgroups\fR,
and creates a suitable outbound-batching directory.
If the
.B \-L
option is given, the \fBL\fR flag is included to restrict the feed to
locally-generated articles only.
If the 
.B \-f
option is given, then the argument following it is used as the
flags field for the \fIsys\fR entry instead of the default \fBf\fP.
If \fIgroups\fR does not include a distribution list (separated from the
newsgroups by a `/'), the default distribution list `/all' is appended.
If \fIgroups\fR is of the form \fB=\fIname\fR,
this specifies the same groups as those fed to site `\fIname\fR',
with the exception that `to.\fIname\fR' is rewritten to `to.\fIsite\fR'.
.PP
.I Act.to.times
emits (on standard output) a new
.I active.times
file (see
.IR active.times (5))
based on the contents of
.IR activefile ,
which should normally be
.IR \*c/active .
.PP
.I Histfrom
emits (on standard output) all history lines for unexpired articles
arriving between
.I startdate
and
.IR enddate .
The dates must be acceptable to
.I getdate
(see
.IR newsaux (8)).
The default
.I enddate
is ``now''.
.PP
.I Newsfrom
runs
.I histfrom
and processes its output to produce a list of absolute pathnames of
articles arriving between
.I startdate
and
.I enddate
(default ``now'').
.PP
.I Addmissing
scans the
.I history
file and the news-article tree to find articles that are not in the history
file, and adds them to the file
and the
.I dbz
database.
If the
.B \-d
option is given,
.I addmissing
rebuilds the
.I dbz
database from scratch after adding the missing articles to the history file;
this is a convenience for use in disaster-recovery situations where
manual repairs to the history file have rendered the file incomplete
and the
.I dbz
database invalid.
.SH FILES
.ta 6c
.nf
\*c/history	history file
\*c/history.pag	\fIdbz\fR database for history file
\*c/history.dir	\fIdbz\fR database for history file
\*c/log	current news log
\*c/log.o	previous news log
\*c/errlog	current news-error log
\*c/errlog.o*	old news-error logs
\*c/batchlog	current news-batcher log
\*c/batchlog.o*	old news-batcher logs
\*a/in.coming	input-spooling area
\*a/out.going	output-batching area
\*c/watchtime	last time \fInewswatch\fR was run
\*c/active	list of current newsgroups
\*c/active.old	backup copy created by \fIaddgroup\fR and \fIdelgroup\fR
/bin/sh	standard Unix shell
/bin/rc	standard Plan 9 shell
.SH SEE ALSO
df(1), uucp(1), ls(1), ctime(3), getdate(3), hostname(1),
grep(1), news(5), expire(8), newsbatch(8), rnews(8), newsaux(8)
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.I Locknews
complains and exits if it is unable to lock the news system
due to inadequate permissions.
.PP
.I Addfeed
looks for a \fB/default/\fR line
or a line for \fIsite\fR in
the \fIbatchparms\fR file, and if
none is found, warns the user to create one.
.PP
.I Addmissing
complains and exits if it is unable to lock the news system, if
.I expire
appears to be running,
or if there is not enough space for a temporary copy of the
.I history
file and database.
It also notes the presence of articles which did not have intelligible
headers (which are placed into history with an entry specifying immediate
expiry).
Complaints from it about articles being ``already present'' indicate
a corrupt history file rather than merely missing articles;
a complete rebuild is indicated if the offending entries cannot be
identified and removed manually.
.SH HISTORY
Written at U of Toronto by Henry Spencer and Geoff Collyer.
.SH BUGS
\fIDelgroup\fR does not remove files or directories from \*a, although it
prints a reminder to do so.
.PP
The \fB=\fIname\fR form of \fIaddfeed\fR
cannot cope with continued \fIsys\fR lines.
.PP
\fIAddfeed\fR assumes that attention to the \fIbatchparms\fR file suffices
to get batching going for a new feed, which is naive if you are running
\fIsendbatches\fR selectively, i.e. with arguments.
.PP
.I Addmissing
balks at dealing with
articles which are
already in history but with an incomplete
list of pathnames.
This is very hard to fix.
.PP
.I Addmissing
will falsely think articles are missing\(emleading
to the problem above\(emif a newsgroup name has a component longer
than 14 characters on a system which limits directory entries to 14.
This too is fairly hard to fix.
.PP
Various nuisances can result if the maintenance utilities are run as
\fIroot\fR rather than as the owner of the news database.
It's difficult to defend against this.
