.\" =()<.ds a @<NEWSARTS>@>()=
.ds a /usr/spool/news
.\" =()<.ds b @<NEWSBIN>@>()=
.ds b /usr/lib/newsbin
.\" =()<.ds c @<NEWSCTL>@>()=
.ds c /usr/lib/news
.\" =()<.ds m @<NEWSMASTER>@>()=
.ds m usenet
.TH RNEWS 8 "27 Jan 1992"
.BY "C News"
.SH NAME
rnews, cunbatch \- accept and spool news input
.br
newsspool, newsrun, c7decode \- news input spooler and processing
.br
newsrunning \- control news-processing daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rnews
.br
.B cunbatch
.br
.B \*b/input/newsspool
[
.B \-g
grade ] [
.B \-i
] [ file ... ]
.br
.B \*b/input/newsrun
[ grades ]
.br
.B \*b/input/c7decode
.br
.B \*b/input/newsrunning
[\fBon\fR|\fBoff\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Rnews
accepts news from standard input
and spools it up for processing, space permitting.
If space is persistently too short,
.I rnews
looks for the file
.IR \*c/rnews.stall ;
if it is present,
.I rnews
waits patiently for more space to appear,
while if it is absent,
.I rnews
discards the news and reports this.
.PP
.PP
.I Cunbatch
is a historical synonym for
.IR rnews ;
there is no difference in what they do.
.PP
.I Newsspool
is the actual spooling program.
It copies the input \fIfile\fR(s) (standard input
default) to a file in the input-spooling directory
\fI\*a/in.coming\fR,
stripping off any `\fB#!\ cunbatch\fR'
or `\fB#!\ c7unbatch\fR' header as it does so.
The filename is based on the current time,
plus a suffix classifying the file by type (compressed, \fIc7encode\fRd,
or plain text),
plus a possible prefix denoting the one-digit numeric \fIgrade\fR (if the
.B \-g
option is given;
.I rnews
does not use this option).
If invoked with the
.B \-i
option, when finished
.I newsspool
attempts to start
.I newsrun
to process the new news immediately.
.I Rnews
invokes it this way if and only if the file
.I \*c/rnews.immed
exists.
.PP
.I Newsrun
should be run periodically (e.g. by \fIcron\fR(8)) to process spooled news.
.I Newsrunning
can be used to turn \fInewsrun\fR's processing off and on if it is desired
to avoid major news processing during certain hours.
`\fBnewsrunning off\fR' instructs any currently-running \fInewsrun\fR to
stop as soon as possible, and prevents later ones from running.
(This is a slight oversimplification; see the discussion of
.I grades
below.)
`\fBnewsrunning on\fR' removes the inhibition (but does not actually
start a new \fInewsrun\fR).
Without an argument, \fInewsrunning\fR reports the current status:
``off'' or ``on''.
.PP
.I Newsrun
checks for the \fIstop\fR file that
\fInewsrunning\ off\fR creates,
verifies that there is enough disk space for processing,
and then starts processing spooled news.
News is processed in order by \fIgrade\fR:
if the name of the spooled file starts with a digit followed by a period,
the digit is the file's \fIgrade\fR.
Files without a grade are considered to have a grade just after grade 9.
Lower-numbered grades are processed first, with processing within
a grade in chronological order.
.PP
If
.I newsrun
is invoked with a
.I grades
argument, that specifies the grades to be processed.
A
.I grades
argument can be a single grade (`1'), a list (`123'), or a range (`1-5').
In the absence of the argument,
.IR newsrun 's
default is all grades if there is no \fIstop\fR file present, and just
grade 0 if there is a \fIstop\fR file.
If a \fIstop\fR file appears during processing,
.I newsrun
will stop processing all but grade 0 and will exit when there is no
grade-0 news left.
.PP
Each batch is
run through \fIc7decode\fR (if necessary),
de\fIcompress\fRed (if necessary), and then fed
to
\fIrelaynews\fR.
(Files that lack a classification suffix, typically because they arrived
by some means other than \fInewsspool\fR,
are tried first as compressed and then as plain text.)
If \fIrelaynews\fR fails,
\fInewsrun\fR attempts to save
the spooled batch in the \fIbad\fR subdirectory for human inspection.
.PP
.I C7decode
passes standard input to standard output, decoding a complex and bizarre
encoding of 8-bit data as printable ASCII characters.
.SH FILES
.nf
(All in \fI\*a/in.coming\fR)
.sp
.ta 2.5c
000000000	(etc.) unclassified ungraded spooled news
000000000.Z	ungraded compressed spooled news
000000000.t	ungraded plain-text spooled news
000000000.7	ungraded compressed \fIc7encode\fRd spooled news
1.000000000.Z	grade 1 compressed spooled news, etc.
stop	\fInewsrun\fR disable file
bad	directory for failed news
.SH SEE ALSO
compress(1),
newsbatch(8),
newsmail(8),
relaynews(8)
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Complaints are mailed to \fB\*m\fR if something goes wrong.
.SH HISTORY
Part of C News.
Written at University of Toronto by Henry Spencer.
.SH BUGS
\fIC7decode\fR should be part of the underlying transport mechanism.
It hasn't been tested very well in the C News environment.
\fIBdecode\fR (see \fInewsmail\fR(8)) is probably better for most uses.
.PP
.I Relaynews
is a bit too enthusiastic about declaring batches bad, so things may end up
in \fIbad\fR for no terribly good reason.
Actually, it's rare for the contents of \fIbad\fR to be very interesting.
.PP
The grading mechanism relies slightly on collating sequence, and in
particular on `.' collating before the digits.
