.TH DIMP 1 NYU
.SH NAME
dimp \- phototypesetter filter for Imagen laser printers
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR dimp
[ option ] ... [ file ] ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I dimp
and its companions
print
.I files
created by
.IR troff (1)
on an Imagen laser printer.
If no
.I file
is mentioned, the standard input is printed.
The following options are understood.
.TP
.BI \-o list
Print pages whose numbers are given in the comma-separated
.IR list .
The list contains single numbers
.I N
and ranges
.IB N1 \- N2.
A missing 
.I N1
means the lowest-numbered page, a missing
.I N2
means the highest.
.TP
.B \-t
Direct output to the standard output instead of the typesetter.
.TP
.BI \-f " dir"
Take font information from
.I dir
instead of the default.
.TP
.B \-r
Rotate the output (print in landscape mode).
.TP
\fB\-c\fIn\fR
Print \fIn\fR copies of the output.
.TP
\fB\-D\fIcontrol\fR
This argument is passed directly to ipr; it specifies document control
information.
.TP
\fB\-B\fItitle\fR
Jobs printed on the Imagen have a banner page; this option allows the user
to specify a title for the banner page.
.TP
\fB\-x\fIoffset\fR
Specify a horizontal offset (in pixels) for the page image.
.TP
\fB\-y\fIoffset\fR
Specify a vertical offset (in pixels) for the page image.
.TP
\fB\-R\fIresolution\fR
Specify the output resolution of the Imagen printer; the
default is 240 dots per inch.
.PP
The
.I files
for
.I dimp
should be prepared under the corresponding
.B \-Txxx
option of
.IR troff ,
where xxx is the appropriate typesetter (can for Canon, 300
for the Imagen 8/300, etc.).
.SH FILES
/usr/lib/font/devxxx/*	description and raster character files
.br
/usr/lib/font/raster/*	font raster files
.SH SEE ALSO
troff(1)
