.TH GENWIDTH 1 NYU
.SH NAME
genwidth \- generate a width table for device independent troff
.SH SYNOPSIS
genwidth [-u \fIunitsize\fR] [-r \fIres\fR] [-n \fIname\fR] [-s \fIspecial\fR] charmap rstfont
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Genwidth
takes as input a character map table and a RST font and generates on
standard output a width table suitable for
.I makedev
and device independent troff.
.PP
Lines in the character table consist of three fields separated by white
space:
.br
.in +10
name	kerning	position
.br
.in -10
The \fIname\fR field is a string that denotes a troff character name, i.e.,
``a'' for the letter a, or ``dg'' for a degree symbol.  The second
column contains kerning information:  specify 1 for a descender, 2 for
an ascender, or 3 for both.  The third column gives the glyph number
and should be between 1 and 127.  Blank lines and lines beginning
with a # are ignored.
.PP
Note the character map is basically in the same format as a standard
device independent troff width table, with the exception that the
initial keywords and the width column are missing.  The keywords are
generated automatically; the widths are obtained from the RST font.
.PP
.I Genwidth
supports several options:
.TP 5
\-u
Take the next argument, \fIunitsize\fR, as the unitsize of the output
device (as specified in the DESC file).  The default is 16.
.TP 5
\-r
Take the next argument, \fIres\fR, as the resolution of the output
device (as specified in the DESC file).  The default is 240.
.TP 5
\-n
Take the font name from the next argument.  The default is to use
the first two letters of the RST font name (remember, font names
are limited to two letters in troff).
.TP 5
\-s
Take the next argument as a keyword to be inserted in the output width
table.  Usually this would be ``special'' to specify a special font.
.SH SEE ALSO
makedev(1)
.br
B.W. Kernighan, ``Device Independent Troff"
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Self explanatory
.SH BUGS
Should be incorporated with makedev, since it is doing much of the same
work anyway.
.br
The generated width values from the raster file don't always look right;
they may require some hand editing.
