.TH VERTORST 1 NYU
.SH NAME
vertorst \- convert a Versatec raster file to RST format
.SH SYNOPSIS
vertorst [-p \fIsize\fR] [-r \fIres\fR] [-t \fIres\fR] [-s \fIpos\fR] [-d] verfont rstfont
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Vertorst
takes as input a Versatec raster file in
.IR vfont (5)
format, and it produces as output an RST raster file.  RST raster files
can be used by troff, TeX, and device independent troff post-processors.
.PP
.I Vertorst
supports several options:
.TP 5
\-p
Take the next argument, \fIsize\fR, as the point size of the input raster
file.  By default,
.I vertorst
tries to intuit the point size by looking at the suffix of the input
raster file name.
.TP 5
\-r
Take the next argument, \fIres\fR, as the resolution (in dots
per inch) of the input raster file.  The default is 200 dots per inch.
.TP 5
\-t
Take the next argument as the resolution (in dots per inch) of the
output (target) raster file.  The default is 240 dots per inch.
.TP 5
\-s
Take the next argument as the starting character position
in the input raster file (instead of 0).
This option is useful because vfont files can
have up to 256 characters, while RST files only allow 128 characters.
Note almost all vfont files have less than 128 characters, however.
The \fIpos\fR argument should be in
the range 0 to 128.
.TP 5
\-d
Interpret the input file as a raster file in device independent
troff format.  These files are scaled 240 dots per inch and
have \fIalmost\fR the same format as a vfont file.  The main difference
is in the way the number of bytes per raster row is calculated.
.PP
Normally, no options are needed to convert a raster file in the
Berkeley font catalog (files in /usr/lib/vfont).  However, to convert
a device independent troff raster (files in troff/canonfonts.a), you
would use the -d option.
.SH SEE ALSO
pxltorst(1), fe(1), rst(5), vfont(5)
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Self explanatory
.SH BUGS
