'\"
'\" Copyright 1992 Regents of the University of California
'\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this
'\" documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby
'\" granted, provided that this notice appears in all copies.
'\" The University of California makes no representations about
'\" the suitability of this material for any purpose.  It is
'\" provided "as is" without express or implied warranty.
'\" 
'\" $Header: /a/cvs/386BSD/ports/x11/tk/doc/BackgdErr.3,v 1.1 1993/08/09 01:20:58 jkh Exp $ SPRITE (Berkeley)
'\" 
.so man.macros
.HS Tk_BackgroundError tk
.BS
.SH NAME
Tk_BackgroundError \- report Tcl error that occurred in background processing
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tk.h>\fR
.sp
\fBTk_BackgroundError\fR(\fIinterp\fR)
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AS Tcl_Interp *interp
.AP Tcl_Interp *interp in
Interpreter in which the error occurred.
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
This procedure is typically invoked when a Tcl error occurs during
``background processing'' such as executing a Tcl command in response
to a button press or menu entry invocation.
When such an error occurs, the error condition is reported to Tk
or to a widget or some other C code, and there is not usually any
obvious way for that code to report the error to the user.
In these cases the code calls \fBTk_BackgroundError\fR with an
\fIinterp\fR argument identifying the interpreter in which the
error occurred.
\fBTk_BackgroundError\fR attempts to invoke the \fBtkerror\fR
Tcl command to report the error in an application-specific fashion.
If no \fBtkerror\fR command exists, or if it returns with an error condition,
then \fBTk_BackgroundError\fR reports the error itself by printing
a message on the standard error file.

.SH KEYWORDS
background, error, tkerror
