'\"
'\" Copyright 1990 Regents of the University of California
'\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this
'\" documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby
'\" granted, provided that this notice appears in all copies.
'\" The University of California makes no representations about
'\" the suitability of this material for any purpose.  It is
'\" provided "as is" without express or implied warranty.
'\" 
'\" $Header: /a/cvs/386BSD/ports/x11/tk/doc/GetOption.3,v 1.1 1993/08/09 01:21:00 jkh Exp $ SPRITE (Berkeley)
'\" 
.so man.macros
.HS Tk_GetOption tk
.BS
.SH NAME
Tk_GetOption \- retrieve an option from the option database
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tk.h>\fR
.sp
Tk_Uid
\fBTk_GetOption\fR(\fItkwin, name, class\fR)
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AS Tk_Window *class
.AP Tk_Window tkwin in
Token for window.
.AP char *name in
Name of desired option.
.AP char *class in
Class of desired option.  Null means there is no class for
this option;  do lookup based on name only.
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
This procedure is invoked to retrieve an option from the database
associated with \fItkwin\fR's main window.  If there is an option
for \fItkwin\fR that matches the given \fIname\fR or \fIclass\fR,
then it is returned in the form of a Tk_Uid.  If multiple options
match \fIname\fR and \fIclass\fR, then the highest-priority one
is returned.  If no option matches, then NULL is returned.
.PP
\fBTk_GetOption\fR caches options related to \fItkwin\fR so that
successive calls for the same \fItkwin\fR will execute much more
quickly than successive calls for different windows.

.SH KEYWORDS
class, name, option, retrieve
