'\"
'\" Copyright 1990 Regents of the University of California
'\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this
'\" documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby
'\" granted, provided that this notice appears in all copies.
'\" The University of California makes no representations about
'\" the suitability of this material for any purpose.  It is
'\" provided "as is" without express or implied warranty.
'\" 
'\" $Header: /a/cvs/386BSD/ports/x11/tk/doc/GetRootCrd.3,v 1.1 1993/08/09 01:21:00 jkh Exp $ SPRITE (Berkeley)
'\" 
.so man.macros
.HS Tk_GetRootCoords tk
.BS
.SH NAME
Tk_GetRootCoords \- Compute root-window coordinates of window
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tk.h>\fR
.sp
\fBTk_GetRootCoords\fR(\fItkwin, xPtr, yPtr\fR)
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AS Tk_Window tkwin
.AP Tk_Window tkwin in
Token for window.
.AP int *xPtr out
Pointer to location in which to store root-window x-coordinate
corresponding to left edge of \fItkwin\fR's border.
.AP int *yPtr out
Pointer to location in which to store root-window y-coordinate
corresponding to top edge of \fItkwin\fR's border.
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
This procedure scans through the structural information maintained
by Tk to compute the root-window coordinates corresponding to
the upper-left corner of \fItkwin\fR's border.  If \fItkwin\fR has
no border, then \fBTk_GetRootCoords\fR returns the root-window
coordinates corresponding to location (0,0) in \fItkwin\fR.
\fBTk_GetRootCoords\fR is relatively efficient, since it doesn't have to
communicate with the X server.

.SH KEYWORDS
coordinates, root window
