'\"
'\" Copyright 1990 Regents of the University of California
'\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this
'\" documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby
'\" granted, provided that this notice appears in all copies.
'\" The University of California makes no representations about
'\" the suitability of this material for any purpose.  It is
'\" provided "as is" without express or implied warranty.
'\" 
'\" $Header: /a/cvs/386BSD/ports/x11/tk/doc/GetRelief.3,v 1.1 1993/08/09 01:21:00 jkh Exp $ SPRITE (Berkeley)
'\" 
.so man.macros
.HS Tk_GetRelief tk
.BS
.SH NAME
Tk_GetRelief, Tk_NameOfRelief \- translate between strings and relief values
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tk.h>\fR
.sp
int
\fBTk_GetRelief(\fIinterp, name, reliefPtr\fB)\fR
.sp
char *
\fBTk_NameOfRelief(\fIrelief\fB)\fR
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AS "Tcl_Interp" *reliefPtr
.AP Tcl_Interp *interp in
Interpreter to use for error reporting.
.AP char *name in
String containing relief name (one of ``flat'', ``raised'', or ``sunken'').
.AP int *reliefPtr out
Pointer to location in which to store relief value corresponding to
\fIname\fR.
.AP int relief in
Relief value (one of TK_RELIEF_FLAT, TK_RELIEF_RAISED, or TK_RELIEF_SUNKEN).
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fBTk_GetRelief\fR places in \fI*reliefPtr\fR the relief value
corresponding to \fIname\fR.  This value will be one of
TK_RELIEF_FLAT, TK_RELIEF_RAISED, or TK_RELIEF_SUNKEN.
Under normal circumstances the return value is TCL_OK and
\fIinterp\fR is unused.
If \fIname\fR doesn't contain one of the three valid relief names
(``flat'', ``raised'', or ``sunken'') or an abbreviation of one
of these names, then an error message is stored in \fIinterp->result\fR,
TCL_ERROR is returned, and \fI*reliefPtr\fR is unmodified.
.PP
\fBTk_NameOfRelief\fR is the logical inverse of \fBTk_GetRelief\fR.
Given a relief value (one of TK_RELIEF_FLAT, TK_RELIEF_RAISED,
or TK_RELIEF_SUNKEN) it returns the corresponding string (``flat'',
``raised'', or ``sunken'', respectively).  If \fIrelief\fR isn't
a legal relief value, then ``unknown relief'' is returned.

.SH KEYWORDS
name, relief, string
