'\"
'\" Copyright 1990 Regents of the University of California
'\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this
'\" documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby
'\" granted, provided that this notice appears in all copies.
'\" The University of California makes no representations about
'\" the suitability of this material for any purpose.  It is
'\" provided "as is" without express or implied warranty.
'\" 
'\" $Header: /a/cvs/386BSD/ports/x11/tk/doc/GetVRoot.3,v 1.1 1993/08/09 01:21:00 jkh Exp $ SPRITE (Berkeley)
'\" 
.so man.macros
.HS Tk_GetVRootGeometry tk
.BS
.SH NAME
Tk_GetVRootGeometry \- Get location and size of virtual root for window
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tk.h>\fR
.sp
\fBTk_GetVRootGeometry(\fItkwin, xPtr, yPtr, widthPtr, heightPtr\fB)
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AS Tk_Window heightPtr
.AP Tk_Window tkwin in
Token for window whose virtual root is to be queried.
.AP int xPtr out
Points to word in which to store x-offset of virtual root.
.AP int yPtr out
Points to word in which to store y-offset of virtual root.
.AP "unsigned int" widthPtr out
Points to word in which to store width of virtual root.
.AP "unsigned int" heightPtr out
Points to word in which to store height of virtual root.
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fBTkGetVRootGeometry\fR returns geometry information about the virtual
root window associated with \fItkwin\fR.  The ``associated'' virtual
root is the one in which \fItkwin\fR's nearest top-level ancestor (or
\fItkwin\fR itself if it is a top-level window) has
been reparented by the window manager.  This window is identified by
a \fB__SWM_ROOT\fR or \fB__WM_ROOT\fR property placed on the top-level
window by the window manager.
If \fItkwin\fR is not associated with a virtual root (e.g.
because the window manager doesn't use virtual roots) then *\fIxPtr\fR and
*\fIyPtr\fR will be set to 0 and *\fIwidthPtr\fR and *\fIheightPtr\fR
will be set to the dimensions of the screen containing \fItkwin\fR.

.SH KEYWORDS
geometry, height, location, virtual root, width, window manager
