'\"
'\" Copyright 1990 Regents of the University of California
'\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this
'\" documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby
'\" granted, provided that this notice appears in all copies.
'\" The University of California makes no representations about
'\" the suitability of this material for any purpose.  It is
'\" provided "as is" without express or implied warranty.
'\" 
'\" $Header: /a/cvs/386BSD/ports/x11/tk/doc/MapWindow.3,v 1.1 1993/08/09 01:21:01 jkh Exp $ SPRITE (Berkeley)
'\" 
.so man.macros
.HS Tk_MapWindow tk
.BS
.SH NAME
Tk_MapWindow, Tk_UnmapWindow \- map or unmap a window
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tk.h>\fR
.sp
Tk_Window
\fBTk_MapWindow\fR(\fItkwin\fR)
.sp
\fBTk_UnmapWindow\fR(\fItkwin\fR)
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AS Tk_Window parent
.AP Tk_Window tkwin in
Token for window.
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
These procedures may be used to map and unmap windows
managed by Tk.  \fBTk_MapWindow\fR maps the window given
by \fItkwin\fR, and also creates an X window corresponding
to \fItkwin\fR if it doesn't already exist.  See the
\fBTk_CreateMainWindow\fR manual entry for information on
deferred window creation.
\fBTk_UnmapWindow\fR unmaps \fItkwin\fR's window
from the screen.
.PP
If \fItkwin\fR is a child window (i.e. \fBTk_CreateChildWindow\fR was
used to create it), then event handlers interested in map and unmap events
are invoked immediately.  If \fItkwin\fR isn't an internal window,
then the event handlers will be invoked later, after X has seen
the request and returned an event for it.
.PP
These procedures should be used in place of the X procedures
\fBXMapWindow\fR and \fBXUnmapWindow\fR, since they update
Tk's local data structure for \fItkwin\fR.  Applications
using Tk should not invoke \fBXMapWindow\fR and \fBXUnmapWindow\fR
directly.

.SH KEYWORDS
map, unmap, window
