'\"
'\" Copyright 1990 Regents of the University of California
'\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this
'\" documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby
'\" granted, provided that this notice appears in all copies.
'\" The University of California makes no representations about
'\" the suitability of this material for any purpose.  It is
'\" provided "as is" without express or implied warranty.
'\" 
'\" $Header: /a/cvs/386BSD/ports/x11/tk/doc/MoveToplev.3,v 1.1 1993/08/09 01:21:01 jkh Exp $ SPRITE (Berkeley)
'\" 
.so man.macros
.HS Tk_MoveToplevelWindow tk
.BS
.SH NAME
Tk_MoveToplevelWindow \- Adjust the position of a top-level window
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tk.h>\fR
.sp
\fBTk_MoveToplevelWindow(\fItkwin, x, y\fB)
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AS Tk_Window tkwin
.AP Tk_Window tkwin in
Token for top-level window to move.
.AP int x in
New x-coordinate for the top-left pixel of \fItkwin\fR's border, or the
top-left pixel of the decorative border supplied for \fItkwin\fR by the
window manager, if there is one.
.AP int y in
New y-coordinate for the top-left pixel of \fItkwin\fR's border, or the
top-left pixel of the decorative border supplied for \fItkwin\fR by the
window manager, if there is one.
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
In general, a window should never set its own position;  this should be
done only by the geometry manger that is responsible for the window.
For top-level windows the window manager is effectively the geometry
manager;  Tk provides interface code between the application and the
window manager to convey the application's desires to the geometry
manager.  The desired size for a top-level window is conveyed using
the usual \fBTk_GeometryRequest\fR mechanism.  The procedure
\fBTk_MoveToplevelWindow\fR may be used by an application to request
a particular position for a top-level window;  this procedure is
similar in function to the \fBwm geometry\fR Tcl command except that
negative offsets cannot be specified.  It is invoked by widgets such as
menus that want to appear at a particular place on the screen.
.PP
When \fBTk_MoveToplevelWindow\fR is called it doesn't immediately
pass on the new desired location to the window manager;  it defers
this action until all other outstanding work has been completed,
using the \fBTk_DoWhenIdle\fR mechanism.

.SH KEYWORDS
position, top-level window, window manager
