'\"
'\" Copyright 1990 Regents of the University of California
'\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this
'\" documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby
'\" granted, provided that this notice appears in all copies.
'\" The University of California makes no representations about
'\" the suitability of this material for any purpose.  It is
'\" provided "as is" without express or implied warranty.
'\" 
'\" $Header: /a/cvs/386BSD/ports/x11/tk/doc/OwnSelect.3,v 1.1 1993/08/09 01:21:01 jkh Exp $ SPRITE (Berkeley)
'\" 
.so man.macros
.HS Tk_OwnSelection tk
.BS
.SH NAME
Tk_OwnSelection \- make a window the owner of the primary selection
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tk.h>\fR
.sp
\fBTk_OwnSelection\fR(\fItkwin, proc, clientData\fR)
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AS Tk_LostSelProc clientData
.AP Tk_Window tkwin in
Window that is to become new selection owner.
.AP Tk_LostSelProc *proc in
Procedure to invoke when \fItkwin\fR loses selection ownership later.
.AP ClientData clientData in
Arbitrary one-word value to pass to \fIproc\fR.
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fBTk_OwnSelection\fR arranges for \fItkwin\fR to become the
new owner of the primary selection.  After this call completes, future requests
for the selection will be directed to handlers created for
\fItkwin\fR using \fBTk_CreateSelHandler\fR.  When \fItkwin\fR
eventually loses the selection ownership, \fIproc\fR will be
invoked so that the window can clean itself up (e.g. by
unhighlighting the selection).  \fIProc\fR should have arguments and
result that match the type \fBTk_LostSelProc\fR:
.nf
.RS
typedef void Tk_LostSelProc(ClientData \fIclientData\fR);
.RE
.fi
The \fIclientData\fP parameter to \fIproc\fR is a copy of the
\fIclientData\fP argument given to \fBTk_OwnSelection\fR, and is
usually a pointer to a data structure containing application-specific
information about \fItkwin\fR.
.PP
Once a window has become selection owner, it will remain owner until
either the window is deleted or until some other window claims
ownership.  There is no way for a window to disavow ownership of the
selection once it has received it.

.SH KEYWORDS
own, selection owner
