'\"
'\" Copyright 1990 Regents of the University of California
'\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this
'\" documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby
'\" granted, provided that this notice appears in all copies.
'\" The University of California makes no representations about
'\" the suitability of this material for any purpose.  It is
'\" provided "as is" without express or implied warranty.
'\" 
'\" $Header: /a/cvs/386BSD/ports/x11/tk/doc/RegInterp.3,v 1.1 1993/08/09 01:21:01 jkh Exp $ SPRITE (Berkeley)
'\" 
.so man.macros
.HS Tk_RegisterInterp tk
.BS
.SH NAME
Tk_RegisterInterp \- make an interpreter accessible with ``send'' command
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tk.h>\fR
.sp
int
\fBTk_RegisterInterp\fR(\fIinterp, name, tkwin\fR)
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AS Tk_Window parent
.AP Tcl_Interp *interp in
Interpreter to register in display associated with \fItkwin\fR.
Also used to return errors if registration failed.
.AP char *name in
Name under which to register interpreter.  Must be unique among
all registered interpreters for \fItkwin\fR's display.  May not
contain the character ``|''.
.AP Tk_Window tkwin in
Token for window.  Used only to find a display in which to
register \fIinterp\fR.
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fBTk_RegisterInterp\fR is invoked to associate a name (\fIname\fR) with a
Tcl interpreter (\fIinterp\fR) and record that association in a well-known
property of a particular display (the one containing \fItkwin\fR).
After this procedure has been invoked, other interpreters in the
display will be able to use the \fBsend\fR command to invoke operations
remotely in \fIinterp\fR.  The procedure returns TCL_OK if the
registration completed successfully and TCL_ERROR if the interpreter
could not be registered (e.g. because \fIname\fR is already in use).
In the event of an error, \fIinterp->result\fR is modified to point
to a message describing the error.
.PP
This procedure also adds a \fBsend\fR command to \fIinterp\fR, so
that commands may be sent from \fIinterp\fR to other interpreters.
.PP
The registration persists until the interpreter is deleted or the
\fBsend\fR command is deleted from \fIinterp\fR, at which
point \fIinterp\fR is automatically unregistered.
.PP
\fBTk_RegisterInterp\fR is called automatically by \fBTk_CreateMainWindow\fR,
so applications don't normally need to call it explicitly.

.SH KEYWORDS
interpreter, name, register, send command
