'\"
'\" Copyright 1992 Regents of the University of California
'\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this
'\" documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby
'\" granted, provided that this notice appears in all copies.
'\" The University of California makes no representations about
'\" the suitability of this material for any purpose.  It is
'\" provided "as is" without express or implied warranty.
'\" 
'\" $Header: /a/cvs/386BSD/ports/x11/tk/doc/SetCModel.3,v 1.1 1993/08/09 01:21:01 jkh Exp $ SPRITE (Berkeley)
'\" 
.so man.macros
.HS Tk_SetColorModel tk
.BS
.SH NAME
Tk_SetColorModel, Tk_GetColorModel \- access color model for screen
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tk.h>\fR
.sp
\fBTk_SetColorModel\fR(\fItkwin\fR, \fImodel\fB)\fR
.sp
Tk_ColorModel
\fBTk_GetColorModel\fR(\fItkwin\fB)\fR
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AS "Tk_ColorModel" model
.AP Tk_Window tkwin in
Token for window.
.AP Tk_ColorModel model in
New model to use for \fIwindow\fR's screen.
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
These procedures allow the color model for a screen
to be read and written.
See the documentation for the \fBtk colormodel\fR command for details
on the color model and how it is used.
\fBTk_SetColorModel\fR sets the color model for the screen
associated with \fItkwin\fR to \fImodel\fR.  \fIModel\fR must be
either \fBTK_COLOR\fR or \fBTK_MONO\fR.
In contrast to the \fBtk colormodel\fR command, there are no
restrictions on the value passed to \fBTk_SetColorModel\fR (you can
set the model to \fBTK_COLOR\fR even if the screen only has one
bit plane).
\fBTk_GetColorModel\fR returns the current color model for the
screen associated with \fItkwin\fR.

.SH KEYWORDS
color model, screen
