'\"
'\" Copyright 1990 Regents of the University of California
'\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this
'\" documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby
'\" granted, provided that this notice appears in all copies.
'\" The University of California makes no representations about
'\" the suitability of this material for any purpose.  It is
'\" provided "as is" without express or implied warranty.
'\" 
'\" $Header: /a/cvs/386BSD/ports/x11/tk/doc/SetGrid.3,v 1.1 1993/08/09 01:21:02 jkh Exp $ SPRITE (Berkeley)
'\" 
.so man.macros
.HS Tk_SetGrid tk
.BS
.SH NAME
Tk_SetGrid \- control the grid for interactive resizing
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tk.h>\fR
.sp
\fBTk_SetGrid\fR(\fItkwin, reqWidth, reqHeight, widthInc, heightInc\fR)
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AS Tk_Window heightInc
.AP Tk_Window tkwin in
Token for window.
.AP int reqWidth in
Width in grid units that corresponds to the pixel dimension \fItkwin\fR
has requested via \fBTk_GeometryRequest\fR.
.AP int reqHeight in
Height in grid units that corresponds to the pixel dimension \fItkwin\fR
has requested via \fBTk_GeometryRequest\fR.
.AP int widthInc in
Width of one grid unit, in pixels.
.AP int heightInc in
Height of one grid unit, in pixels.
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fBTk_SetGrid\fR is typically invoked by a widget when its \fBsetGrid\fR
option is true.
This procedure allows a widget to control interactive resizing of its
top-level window so that the space allocated to the widget is equal to
the space requested by the widget using \fBTk_GeometryRequest\fR, plus
or minus even multiples of \fIwidthInc\fR and \fIheightInc\fR.
\fBTk_SetGrid\fR turns on gridded geometry management for the top-level
window associated with \fItkwin\fR, and records the relationship between
pixel sizes and grid sizes as defined by \fIreqWidth\fR, \fIreqHeight\fR,
\fIwidthInc\fR, and \fIheightInc\fR.
.PP
See the \fBwm\fR manual entry for complete details on gridded geometry
management.
There is currently no way to turn off gridded geometry management using
a C procedure call;  instead, invoke the ``\fBwm grid\fR'' command.

.SH KEYWORDS
grid, window, window manager
