'\"
'\" Copyright 1992 Regents of the University of California
'\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this
'\" documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby
'\" granted, provided that this notice appears in all copies.
'\" The University of California makes no representations about
'\" the suitability of this material for any purpose.  It is
'\" provided "as is" without express or implied warranty.
'\" 
'\" $Header: /a/cvs/386BSD/ports/x11/tk/doc/SetVisual.3,v 1.1 1993/08/09 01:21:02 jkh Exp $ SPRITE (Berkeley)
'\" 
.so man.macros
.HS Tk_SetWindowVisual tk
.BS
.SH NAME
.na
Tk_SetWindowVisual \- change visual characteristics of window
.ad
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tk.h>\fR
.sp
int
\fBTk_SetWindowVisual\fR(\fItkwin, visual, depth, colormap\fR)
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AS "unsigned int" colormap
.AP Tk_Window tkwin in
Token for window.
.AP Visual *visual in
New visual type to use for \fItkwin\fR.
.AP "unsigned int" depth in
Number of bits per pixel desired for \fItkwin\fR.
.AP Colormap colormap in
New colormap for \fItkwin\fR, which must be compatible with
\fIvisual\fR and \fIdepth\fR.
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
When Tk creates a new window it assigns it the default visual
characteristics (visual, depth, and colormap) for its screen.
\fBTk_SetWindowVisual\fR may be called to change them.
\fBTk_SetWindowVisual\fR must be called before the window has
actually been created in X (e.g. before \fBTk_MapWindow\fR or
\fBTk_MakeWindowExist\fR has been invoked for the window).
The safest thing is to call \fBTk_SetWindowVisual\fR immediately
after calling \fBTk_CreateWindow\fR.
If \fItkwin\fR has already been created before \fBTk_SetWindowVisual\fR
is called then it returns 0 and doesn't make any changes;  otherwise
it returns 1 to signify that the operation
completed successfully.
.PP
Note:  \fBTk_SetWindowVisual\fR should not be called if you just want
to change a window's colormap without changing its visual or depth;
call \fBTk_SetWindowColormap\fR instead.

.SH KEYWORDS
colormap, depth, visual
