.TH TEX 1  3/12/90
.SH NAME
tex, initex, virtex  \- text formatting and typesetting
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tex
[ first line ]
.PP
.B initex
[ first line ]
.PP
.B virtex
[ first line ]
.ie t .ds TX \fRT\v'+0.3m'E\v'-0.3m'X\fP \" for troff
.el .ds TX TeX\" for nroff
.\" to use, type \*(TX
.ie t .ds OX \fIT\v'+0.3m'E\v'-0.3m'X\fP\" for troff
.el .ds OX TeX\" for nroff
.\" the same but obliqued

.SH DESCRIPTION
\*(TX
formats the interspersed text and commands contained in the named
files
and outputs a typesetter independent file (called
.I DVI
which is short for
.IR D e V ice
.IR I ndependent ).
\*(TX
capabilities and language are described in
.I The \*(OXbook
by Donald E. Knuth, published by Addison-Wesley.
.PP
\*(TX
is normally used with a large body of precompiled macros,
and there are several specific formatting systems, such as
LaTeX, 
which require the support of several macro files.  The basic
programs as compiled are called
.I initex
and
.I virtex, 
and are distinguished by the fact that 
.I initex 
can be used to precompile macros into a ``*.\|fmt'' file,
which is used by
.I virtex. Virtex
can read a precompiled ``*.\|fmt'' file, but it cannot create one.  It is
the version of
\*(TX
which usually lies behind a working typesetting formatter.
.PP
Any arguments given on the command line to the
\*(TX
programs are passed to them as the first input line.
(But it is often easier to type extended arguments
as the first input line, since Unix shells tend
to gobble up or misinterpret \*(TX's favorite symbols
unless you quote them.)
As described in 
.I The \*(OXbook,
that first line should begin with a file name
or a \\controlsequence.
The normal usage is to say
.RB `` tex
.IR paper ''
to start processing 
.I paper\|.\|tex.
The name ``paper'' will be the ``jobname'', and is used in forming
output file names.
If \*(TX doesn't get a file name in the first line, the jobname is ``texput''.
The default `\|.\|tex' extension can be overridden by specifying an extension
explicitly. There is no way to read a \*(TX input file with
no filename extension.
.PP
If there is no paper\|.\|tex in the current directory, \*(TX will look
look through a search path of directories to try to find it.
If ``paper'' is the ``jobname''
a log of error messages, with rather more detail than
normally appears on the screen, will appear in 
.I paper\|.\|log,
and the output file will be in
.I paper\|.\|dvi.
The standard library on the default search path
has the basic format package, 
.I plain\|.\|tex, 
described in 
.I The \*(OXbook, 
as well as several others.
Files such as 
.I plain\|.\|tex,
(e.g., the basic files associated with LaTeX:
.I lplain\|.\|tex,
.I lfonts\|.\|tex,
and 
.IR latex\|.\|tex )
are used to prepare ``predigested'' 
.I .\|fmt 
files. 
(Except when \fI.\|fmt\fP files are being prepared
it is hardly ever necessary to \\Input plain, since almost
all instances of the \*(TX program begin by loading these
predigested versions of it.)
This means that all of the control sequences discussed in 
.I The \*(OXbook
are known to \*(TX.  For a discussion of \fI.\|fmt\fP files,
see below.
.PP
Several environment variables can be used to set up directory
paths to search when \*(TX opens a file for input.
For example, the
.I csh
command
.br
.in +4
setenv \s-2TEXINPUTS\s0 .\|:\|/usr/me/mylib:/usr/local/lib/tex/inputs
.in -4
or the
.I sh
command sequence
.br
.in +4
\s-2TEXINPUTS\s0=.\|:\|/usr/me/mylib:/usr/local/lib/tex/inputs
.br
export \s-2TEXINPUTS\s0
.in -4
.br
would cause all invocations of \*(TX and its derivatives to look for
\\input files first in the current directory, then in a hypothetical
user's ``mylib'', and finally in the system library.
Normally, the user will place the command sequence which sets up the
\s-2TEXINPUTS\s0 environment variable in the
.I .cshrc
or
.I .profile
file.
The Environment section below lists the relevant environment variables,
and their defaults.
.PP
The
.I e
response to \*(TX's error prompt causes the
.I GNU emacs
editor to start up at the current line of the current file.
There is an environment variable, \s-2TEXEDIT\s0, that can be used to change the
editor used.  It should contain a string with "%s" indicating where the
filename goes and "%d" indicating where the decimal linenumber (if any) goes.
For example, a \s-2TEXEDIT\s0 string for
.I vi
can be set by:
.br
.ti +4
setenv \s-2TEXEDIT\s0 "/usr/bin/vi +%d %s"
.br
.PP
.PP
A convenient file in the library is null\|.\|tex, containing nothing.
When \*(TX can't find a file it thinks you want to input, it keeps
asking you for another file name;  responding `null' gets you out
of the loop if you don't want to input anything.
.PP
The
.I initex
and
.IR virtex 
programs
can be used to create fast-loading customized versions of \*(TX 
based on complex macro files.
The
.I initex
program is used to create a
.I format (.\|fmt)
file that permits fast loading of fonts and macro packages.
After processing the fonts and definitions desired, a \\dump command
will create the format file.
The format file is used by
.I virtex.
It needs to be given a format file name as the first thing it reads.
A format file name is preceded by an &, which needs to be escaped with \\
if given on the command line.
.PP
Fortunately, it is no longer necessary to make explicit references
to the format file.  The present version of \*(TX, when compiled
from this distribution, looks at its own command line to determine
what name it was called under.  It then uses that name, with the
``.\|fmt'' suffix appended, to search for the appropriate format file.
You should probably make up one format file with the name
.I tex\|.\|fmt,
with only the 
.I plain\|.\|tex 
file in it.  
This will be your format file when
you invoke \fIvirtex\fP with the name \fBtex\fP.
You can also create a file mytex\|.\|fmt using \fIinitex\fP,
so that this will be loaded when you invoke 
\fIvirtex\fP with the name \fBmytex\fP.
To make the whole thing work, it is necessary to link \fIvirtex\fP to all
the names of format files that you have prepared.  Hard links will do
for system-wide equivalences and Unix systems which do
not use symbolic links.  Symbolic links can be used for access 
to formats for individual projects.  For example: 
\fIvirtex\fP can be hard linked to \fItex\fP in the
general system directory for executable programs, but
an individual version of \*(TX will more likely be
linked by a symbolic link in a privately maintained path
.br
.ti +4
ln \-s /usr/local/bin/virtex mytex
.br
in a directory such as \fI/home/me/bin\fP.
.PP
An older approach is to
set up a Cshell alias with
.br
.ti +4
alias mytex "virtex \\&myfmt"
.br
Besides being more cumbersome, however, this approach is
not available to systems which do not accept aliases.
Finally there is the system known as ``undump'' which
takes the headers from an \fIa.out\fP file (e.g. \fIvirtex\fP)
and applies them to a core image which has been dumped
by the Unix \s-2QUIT\s0 signal.  This is very system-dependent,
and produces extremely large files when used with a large-memory
version of \*(TX.  It is less and less used.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The defaults for all environments are set at the
time of compilation, by reference to a file called site.h.
The values given below are set in the distributed version
of this file, and are likely to be different at many
sites.
.PP
.IP \s-2TEXINPUTS\s0
Search path for \\input and \\openin files.  It should be colon-separated,
and start with ``.''.  The entire path must be no longer than 700
characters long.
Default: .\|:\|/usr/local/lib/tex/inputs
.IP \s-2TEXFONTS\s0
Search path for font metric files.  The entire path must be no longer than 700
characters long.  Default: .\|:\|/usr/local/lib/tex/fonts/tfm
.IP \s-2TEXFORMATS\s0
Search path for format files.  Default: .\|:\|/usr/local/lib/tex/formats
.IP \s-2TEXPOOL\s0
Search path for \s-2INITEX\s0 internal strings.  Default: .\|:\|/usr/local/lib/tex
.IP \s-2TEXEDIT\s0
Command template for switching to editor.  
Default: "emacs +%d %s"

.SH FILES

.TP 1.5i
/usr/local/lib/tex
\*(TX's library areas
.TP
/usr/local/lib/tex/tex.pool
Encoded text of \*(TX's messages
.TP
/usr/local/lib/tex/fonts/tfm/*.tfm
Width information used by \*(TX (TeX Font Metric files)
.TP
/usr/local/lib/tex/fonts/{gf,pk}\fInnn\fP
Bit maps for low resolution devices. (An old and bad habit
was to include these with the associated \fItfm\fP files,
which produced a single directory of unmanageable 
complexity.  This should not be done, as these
files have no direct connection with \*(TX, but
only with programs for interpreting DVI files onto
paper or CRT screens.)
.TP
/usr/local/lib/tex/formats/*\|.\|fmt
\*(TX .\|fmt files
.TP
/usr/local/lib/tex/inputs/plain\|.\|tex
The ``default'' macro package
.br
.SH "SEE ALSO"
Donald E. Knuth,
.I The \*(OXbook
.br
Leslie Lamport,
.I The LaTeX  Document Preparation System
.br
Michael Spivak,
.I The Joy of \*(TX
.br
.I TUGBOAT
(the publication of the \*(TX Users Group)
.SH "TRIVIA"
\*(TX, pronounced properly, rhymes with ``blecchhh.''  Note that the proper
spelling in typewriter-like output is ``TeX'' and not ``TEX'' or ``tex.''
.SH "AUTHORS"
\*(TX was designed by Donald E. Knuth, 
who implemented it using his W\s-2EB\s0 system for Pascal programs.
It was ported to Unix at Stanford by Howard Trickey, and
at Cornell by Pavel Curtis.
The version now offered with the Unix \*(TX distribution is that 
generated by the W\s-2EB\s0 to C system, written by Tomas
Rokicki and Tim Morgan.

