.\" Copyright (c) 1990, Minnesota Supercomputer Center, Inc.
.TH RLETORLA 1 "May 30, 1990" 1
.SH NAME
rletorla \- convert a Utah RLE image file into a Wavefront "rlb" image file.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rletorla
[
.B \-h
] [
.B \-v
] [
.I infile
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
This program converts Utah
.IR RLE (5)
image files into Wavefront rlb image files.  Rletorla will handle four types
of RLE files: Grayscale (8 bit data, no color map), Pseudocolor (8 bit data
with a color map), Truecolor (24 bit data with color map), and Directcolor (24
bit data, no color map).  In each case the resulting Wavefront image file will
contain RGB data as well as a matte channel.  If no alpha channel is found in
the RLE file, the Wavefront matte channel will be computed using the RGB or
mapped data.  The entire area of the Wavefront image will be run length encoded.
The size of the Wavefront "bounding box" data structure will be set to that of
the total image area.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-v
This option will cause rletorla to operate in verbose mode.  Header information
is printed to "stderr".
.TP
.B \-h
This option allows the header of the RLE file to be dumped to "stderr" without
converting the file.  It is equivalent to using the \-v option except that no
file conversion takes place.
.TP
.I infile
The name of the RLE image data file to be converted.  The name of the resulting
Wavefront file will be derived from the name of the input file -- the extension
will be changed from "rle" to "rla".  (Note: if you use the extended
input file names described in
.IR urt (1),
this will result in a very strange filename for the Wavefront file.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
rletorla \-v lenna.rle
While running in verbose mode, convert lenna.rle to Wavefront rlb format and
store resulting data in lenna.rla.
.TP
rletorla \-h test.0001.rle
Dump the header information of the RLE file called test.0001.rle.
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR rlatorle (1),
.IR urt (1),
.IR RLE (5).
.SH AUTHOR
.br
Wesley C. Barris
.br
Army High Performance Computing Research Center (AHPCRC)
.br
Minnesota Supercomputer Center, Inc.
