@c Copyright (C) 1992 John W. Eaton
@c This is part of the Octave manual.
@c For copying conditions, see the file gpl.texi.

@node Acknowledgements, Introduction, Top, Top
@chapter Acknowledgements
@cindex acknowledgements

@menu
* Contributors::                People who contributed to developing of Octave.
@end menu

@node  Contributors,  , Acknowledgements, Acknowledgements
@unnumberedsec Contributors to Octave
@cindex contributors

In addition to John W. Eaton, several people have written parts
of Octave.

@c Once lp_solve has been added, don't forget to include the lp_solve
@c author, and Kantor, for providing an example.

@itemize @bullet
@item A. Scottedward Hodel (scotte@@eng.auburn.edu) contributed a number
of functions including @code{expm}, @code{qzval}, @code{qzhess},
@code{syl}, @code{lyap}, and @code{balance}.

@item
John Campbell (jcc@@che.utexas.edu) wrote most of the file and C-style
input and output functions.

@item
R. Bruce Tenison (Bruce.Tenison@@eng.auburn.edu) wrote the @code{hess} and
@code{schur} functions.

@item
Fook Fah Yap (ffy@@eng.cam.ac.uk) provided the @code{fft} and
@code{ifft} functions and valuable bug reports for early versions.

@item
Brian Fox (bfox@@gnu.ai.mit.edu) wrote the readline library used for
command history editing, and the portion of this manual that documents
it.
@end itemize

Special thanks to the following people and organizations for
supporting the development of Octave:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Digital Equipment Corporation, for an equipment grant as part of their
External Research Program.

@item
Sun Microsystems, Inc., for an Academic Equipment grant.

@item
The University of Texas College of Engineering, for providing a
Challenge for Excellence Research Supplement, and for providing an
Academic Development Funds grant.

@item
Texaco Chemical Company, for providing funding to continue the
development of this software.

@item
Noel Bell, Senior Engineer, Texaco Chemical Company, Austin Texas.

@item
James B. Rawlings, Associate Professor, Department of Chemical
Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin.
@end itemize

Portions of this document have been adapted from the GAWK, readline,
GCC, and C library manuals, published by the Free Software Foundation,
675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

This project would not have been possible without the GNU software used
in and used to produce Octave.
