@c Copyright (C) 1992 John W. Eaton
@c This is part of the Octave manual.
@c For copying conditions, see the file gpl.texi.

@node Arithmetic, Linear Algebra, Built-in Variables, Top
@chapter Arithmetic

Unless otherwise noted, all of the functions described in this chapter
will work for real and complex scalar or matrix arguments.

@menu
* Utility Functions::           
* Complex Arithmetic::          
* Trigonometry::                
* Sums and Products::           
@end menu

@node Utility Functions, Complex Arithmetic, Arithmetic, Arithmetic
@section Utility Functions

The following functions are available for working with complex numbers.
Each expects a single argument, and given a matrix, they work on an
element by element basis.

@ftable @code
@item ceil (@var{x})
Return the smallest integer not less than @var{x}.  If @var{x} is
complex, return @code{ceil (real (@var{x})) + ceil (imag (@var{x})) * I}.

@item floor (@var{x})
Return the largest integer not greater than @var{x}.  If @var{x} is
complex, return @code{floor (real (@var{x})) + floor (imag (@var{x})) * I}.

@item fix (@var{x})
Truncate @var{x} toward zero.  If @var{x} is complex, return
@code{fix (real (@var{x})) + fix (imag (@var{x})) * I}.

@item round (@var{x})
Return the integer nearest to @var{x}.  If @var{x} is complex, return
@code{round (real (@var{x})) + round (imag (@var{x})) * I}.

@item sign (@var{x})
Compute the @dfn{signum} function, which is defined as
@iftex
@tex
$$
{\rm sign} (@var{x}) = \cases{1,&$x>0$;\cr 0,&$x=0$;\cr -1,&$x<0$.\cr}
$$
@end tex
@end iftex
@ifinfo
@example
           -1, x < 0;
sign (x) =  0, x = 0;
            1, x > 0.
@end example
@end ifinfo
For complex arguments, @code{sign} returns @code{x ./ abs (@var{x})}.

@item exp (@var{x})
Compute the exponential of @var{x}.  To compute the matrix exponential,
see @ref{Linear Algebra}.

@item log (@var{x})
Compute the natural log of @var{x}.  To compute the matrix logarithm, 
see @ref{Linear Algebra}.

@item log10 (@var{x})
Compute the base-10 log of @var{x}.

@item sqrt (@var{x})
Compute the square root of @var{x}.  To compute the matrix square root,
see @ref{Linear Algebra}.

@item max (@var{x})
For a vector argument, return the maximum value.  For a matrix argument,
return the maximum value from each column, as a row vector.  Thus,

@example
max (max (@var{x}))
@end example

@noindent
returns the largest element of @var{x}.

For complex arguments, the magnitude of the elements are used for
comparison.

@item min (@var{x})
Like @code{max}, but return the minimum value.

@item rem (@var{x}, @var{y})
Return the remainder of @code{@var{x} / @var{y}}, computed using the
expression

@example
x - y .* fix (x ./ y)
@end example

An error message is printed if the dimensions of the arguments do not
agree, or if either of the arguments is complex.
@end ftable

@node Complex Arithmetic, Trigonometry, Utility Functions, Arithmetic
@section Complex Arithmetic

The following functions are available for working with complex
numbers.  Each expects a single argument.  Given a matrix they work on
an element by element basis.

@ftable @code
@item abs (@var{x})
Compute the magnitude of @var{x}.

@item angle (@var{x})
@itemx arg (@var{x})
Compute the argument of @var{x}.

@item conj (@var{x})
Return the complex conjugate of @var{x}.

@item imag (@var{x})
Return the imaginary part of @var{x}.

@item real (@var{x})
Return the real part of @var{x}.
@end ftable

@node Trigonometry, Sums and Products, Complex Arithmetic, Arithmetic
@section Trigonometry

Octave provides the following trigonometric functions:

@example
sin    asin    sinh    asinh
cos    acos    cosh    acosh
tan    atan    tanh    atanh
@end example

@findex sin
@findex cos
@findex tan
@findex asin
@findex acos
@findex atan
@findex sinh
@findex cosh
@findex tanh
@findex asinh
@findex acosh
@findex atanh

@noindent
Each of these functions expect a single argument.  For matrix arguments,
they work on an element by element basis.  For example, the expression

@example
sin ([1, 2; 3, 4])
@end example

@noindent
produces

@example
ans =

   0.84147   0.90930
   0.14112  -0.75680
@end example

@node Sums and Products,  , Trigonometry, Arithmetic
@section Sums and Products

@ftable @code
@item sum (@var{x})
For a vector argument, return the sum of all the elements.  For a matrix
argument, return the sum of the elements in each column, as a row
vector.  The sum of an empty matrix is 0 if it has no columns, or a
vector of zeros if it has no rows (@pxref{Empty Matrices}).

@item prod (@var{x})
For a vector argument, return the product of all the elements.  For a
matrix argument, return the product of the elements in each column, as a
row vector.  The product of an empty matrix is 1 if it has no columns,
or a vector of ones if it has no rows (@pxref{Empty Matrices}).

@item cumsum (@var{x})
Return the cumulative sum of each column of @var{x}.  For example,

@example
cumsum ([1, 2; 3, 4])
@end example

@noindent
produces

@example
ans =

  1  2
  4  6
@end example

@item cumprod (@var{x})
Return the cumulative product of each column of @var{x}.  For example,

@example
cumprod ([1, 2; 3, 4])
@end example

@noindent
produces

@example
ans =

  1  2
  3  8
@end example

@item sumsq (@var{x})
For a vector argument, return the sum of the squares of all the
elements.  For a matrix argument, return the sum of the squares of the
elements in each column, as a row vector.
@end ftable
