@c Copyright (C) 1992 John W. Eaton
@c This is part of the Octave manual.
@c For copying conditions, see the file gpl.texi.

@node Invoking Octave, Command Line Editing, Amusements, Top
@chapter Octave Command Options
@cindex Octave command options
@cindex command options
@cindex options, Octave command

@table @code
@item --debug
@itemx -d
@cindex @code{--debug}
@cindex @code{-d}
Enter parser debugging mode.

@item --norc
@itemx -f
@cindex @code{--norc}
@cindex @code{-f}
Don't read any of the system or user initialization files at startup.

@item --help
@itemx -h
@itemx -?
@cindex @code{--help}
@cindex @code{-h}
@cindex @code{-?}
Print short help message and exit.

@item --interactive
@itemx -i
@cindex @code{--interactive}
@cindex @code{-i}
Force interactive behavior.

@item --info-file @var{filename}
@cindex @code{--info-file @var{filename}}
Specify the name of the info file to use.  The value of @var{filename}
specified on the command line will override any value of
@samp{OCTAVE_INFO_FILE} found in the environment, but not any
@samp{INFO_FILE = "filename"} commands found in the system or user
startup files.

@item --path @var{path}
@itemx -p @var{path}
@cindex @code{--path @var{path}}
@cindex @code{-p @var{path}}
Specify the path to search for M-files.  The value of @var{path}
specified on the command line will override any value of
@samp{OCTAVE_PATH} found in the environment, but not any
@samp{LOADPATH = "path"} commands found in the system or user startup
files.

@item --quiet
@itemx -q
@cindex @code{--quiet}
@cindex @code{-q}
Don't print message at startup.

@item --version
@itemx -v
@cindex @code{--version}
@cindex @code{-v}
Print the program version number and exit.

@item --echo-commands
@itemx -x
@cindex @code{--echo-commands}
@cindex @code{-x}
pEcho commands as they are executed.

@item @var{file}
Execute commands from @var{file}.
@end table
