\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename octave.info

@c @smallbook
@c @setchapternewpage odd
@c @cropmarks
@c @finalout

@c Smaller amounts of whitespace for the 8.5 by 11 inch format.
@tex
\global\chapheadingskip = 15pt plus 4pt minus 2pt 
\global\secheadingskip = 12pt plus 3pt minus 2pt
\global\subsecheadingskip = 9pt plus 2pt minus 2pt
\global\parskip 6pt plus 1pt
@end tex

@iftex
@set DONTINCLUDEGPL
@end iftex

@defindex op

@set VERSION 0.79

@settitle Octave

@ifinfo

Copyright (C) 1993 John W. Eaton.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through Tex and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of
a permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for
modified versions.
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title{Octave}
@subtitle{A high-level interactive language for numerical computations}
@subtitle{Edition 1.0 for Octave version @value{VERSION}}
@subtitle{September 1993}
@author{John W. Eaton}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1993 John W. Eaton.

This is the first edition of the Octave documentation,
and is consistent with version @value{VERSION} of Octave.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the same conditions as for modified versions.
@end titlepage

@ifinfo
@node Top, Acknowledgements, (dir), (dir)
@top

This manual documents how to run, install and port Octave, as well as
its new features and incompatibilities, and how to report bugs.
It corresponds to Octave version @value{VERSION}.
@end ifinfo

@menu
* Acknowledgements::            Thanks.
* Introduction::                A brief introduction to Octave.
* Expressions::                 Expressions.
* Statements::                  Looping and program flow control.
* Built-in Variables::          Descriptions of all built-in variables.
* Arithmetic::                  
* Linear Algebra::              
* Nonlinear Equations::         
* Differential Equations::      
* Optimization::                
* Quadrature::                  
* Control Theory::              
* Signal Processing::           
* Statistics::                  
* Plotting::                    
* Input and Output::            
* Special Matrices::            
* Matrix Manipulation::         
* String Functions::            
* System Utilities::            
* Command History Functions::   
* Help::                        
* Programming Utilities::       
* Amusements::                  
* Invoking Octave::             Command options supported by Octave.
* Command Line Editing::        Command history and editing.
* Installation::                How to configure, compile and install Octave.
* Trouble::                     If you have trouble installing Octave.
* Concept Index::               An item for each concept.
* Variable Index::              An item for each documented variable.
* Function Index::              An item for each documented function.
* Operator Index::              An item for each documented operator.

 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Acknowledgements

* Contributors::                People who contributed to developing of Octave.

A Brief Introduction to Octave

* Running Octave::              
* Simple Examples::             

Expressions

* Constant Expressions::        
* Matrices::                    
* Ranges::                      
* Variables::                   
* Index Expressions::           
* Calling Functions::           
* Global Variables::            
* Keywords::                    
* Arithmetic Ops::              
* Comparison Ops::              
* Boolean Expressions::         
* Assignment Ops::              
* Increment Ops::               
* Operator Precedence::         

Constant Expressions

* Numeric Constants::           
* String Constants::            

Matrices

* Empty Matrices::              

Statements

* Statement Lists::             
* Declaration Statements::      
* Selection Statements::        
* Iteration Statements::        
* Defining Functions::          
* Jump Statements::             

Built-in Variables

* Predefined Constants::        
* User Preferences::            
* Other Built-in Variables::    

Arithmetic

* Utility Functions::           
* Complex Arithmetic::          
* Trigonometry::                
* Sums and Products::           

Linear Algebra

* Basic Matrix Functions::      
* Matrix Factorizations::       
* Functions of a Matrix::       

Differential Equations

* Ordinary Differential Equations::  
* Differential-Algebraic Equations::  

Optimization

* Linear Programming::          
* Quadratic Programming::       
* Nonlinear Programming::       

Quadrature

* Functions of one Variable::   
* Orthogonal Collocation::      

Plotting

* Two-Dimensional Plotting::    
* Three-Dimensional Plotting::  
* Miscellaneous Plotting Functions::  

Input and Output

* Basic Input and Output::      
* C-Style I/O Functions::       

C-Style I/O Functions

* Opening and Closing Files::   
* Formatted Output::            
* Output Conversion Syntax::    
* Table of Output Conversions::  
* Integer Conversions::         
* Floating-Point Conversions::  
* Other Output Conversions::    
* Formatted Input::             
* Input Conversion Syntax::     
* Table of Input Conversions::  
* Numeric Input Conversions::   
* String Input Conversions::    
* Other I/O Functions::         

Special Matrices

* Special Utility Matrices::    
* Famous Matrices::             

Matrix Manipulation

* Finding Elements and Checking Conditions::  
* Rearranging Matrices::        

Help

* Using Info::                  
* Cursor Commands::             
* Scrolling Commands::          
* Node Commands::               
* Searching Commands::          
* Xref Commands::               
* Window Commands::             
* Printing Nodes::              
* Other Info Commands::         
* Info Variables::              

Using Info

* Cursor Commands::	    Commands which move the cursor within a node.
* Scrolling Commands::	    Commands for moving the node around in a window.
* Node Commands::	    Commands for selecting a new node.
* Searching Commands::	    Commands for searching an info file.
* Xref Commands::	    Commands for selecting cross references.
* Window Commands::	    Commands which manipulate multiple windows.
* Printing Nodes::	    How to print out the contents of a node.
* Other Info Commands::     A few commands that defy categories.
* Info Variables::	    How to change the default behaviour of Info.

Selecting Cross References

* Parts of an Xref::            What a cross reference is made of.
* Selecting Xrefs::             Commands for selecting menu or note items.

Manipulating Multiple Windows

* The Mode Line::               What appears in the mode line?
* Basic Windows::               Manipulating windows in Info.
* The Echo Area::               Used for displaying errors and reading input.

Programming Utilities

* Evaluating Strings as Commands::  
* Miscellaneous Utilities::     

Command Line Editing

* Introduction and Notation::   Notation used in this text.
* Readline Interaction::        The minimum set of commands for editing a line.
* Readline Init File::          Customizing Readline from a user's view.

Readline Interaction

* Readline Bare Essentials::    The least you need to know about Readline.
* Readline Movement Commands::  Moving about the input line.
* Readline Killing Commands::   How to delete text, and how to get it back!
* Readline Arguments::          Giving numeric arguments to commands.

Readline Init File

* Readline Init Syntax::        Syntax for the commands in @file{~/.inputrc}.
* Readline Vi Mode::            Switching to @code{vi} mode in Readline.

Readline Init Syntax

* Commands For Moving::         Moving about the line.
* Commands For History::        Getting at previous lines.
* Commands For Text::           Commands for changing text.
* Commands For Killing::        Commands for killing and yanking.
* Numeric Arguments::           Specifying numeric arguments, repeat counts.
* Commands For Completion::     Getting Readline to do the typing for you.
* Miscellaneous Commands::      Other miscellaneous commands.

Installing Octave

* Binary Distributions::        

Binary Distributions

* Installing Octave from a Binary Distribution::  
* Creating a Binary Distribution::  

Known Causes of Trouble with Octave

* Actual Bugs::                 Bugs we will fix later.
* Installation Problems::       Problems that manifest when you install Octave.
* Disappointments::             Regrettable things we can't change.
* Reporting Bugs::              
* Bug Criteria::                
* Bug Lists::                   
* Bug Reporting::               
* Sending Patches::             
* Service::                     

Reporting Bugs

* Bug Criteria::                
* Where: Bug Lists.             Where to send your bug report.
* Reporting: Bug Reporting.     How to report a bug effectively.
* Patches: Sending Patches.     How to send a patch for Octave.
@end menu

@include ack.texi
@include intro.texi
@include expr.texi
@include stmt.texi
@include var.texi
@include arith.texi
@include linalg.texi
@include nonlin.texi
@include diffeq.texi
@include optim.texi
@include quad.texi
@include control.texi
@include signal.texi
@include stats.texi
@include plot.texi
@include io.texi
@include special.texi
@include matrix.texi
@include strings.texi
@include system.texi
@include history.texi
@include help.texi
@include program.texi
@include amuse.texi
@include invoke.texi
@include rluser.texi
@include install.texi
@include bugs.texi
@include cp-idx.texi
@include vr-idx.texi
@include fn-idx.texi
@include op-idx.texi

@contents

@bye
