@c Copyright (C) 1992 John W. Eaton
@c This is part of the Octave manual.
@c For copying conditions, see the file gpl.texi.

@node Optimization, Quadrature, Differential Equations, Top
@chapter Optimization

@menu
* Linear Programming::          
* Quadratic Programming::       
* Nonlinear Programming::       
@end menu

@cindex linear programming
@cindex quadratic programming
@cindex nonlinear programming
@cindex optimization
@cindex LP
@cindex QP
@cindex NLP

@node Linear Programming, Quadratic Programming, Optimization, Optimization
@section Linear Programming

@ftable @code
@item lp_solve

@example
lp_solve ()
@end example

Sorry, this hasn't been implemented yet.
@end ftable

@node Quadratic Programming, Nonlinear Programming, Linear Programming, Optimization
@section Quadratic Programming

@ftable @code
@item qpsol

@example
[x, obj, info, lambda]
   = qpsol (x, H, c, lb, ub, lb, A, ub)
@end example
Solve quadratic programs using Gill and Murray's QPSOL.  Because QPSOL
is not freely redistributable, this function is only available if you
have obtained your own copy of QPSOL.  @xref{Installation}.
@end ftable

@node Nonlinear Programming,  , Quadratic Programming, Optimization
@section Nonlinear Programming

@ftable @code
@item fsqp

@example
fsqp ()
@end example

Sorry, this hasn't been implemented yet.

@item npsol

@example
[x, obj, info, lambda]
   = npsol (x, 'phi', lb, ub, lb, A, ub, lb, 'g', ub)
@end example
Solve nonlinear programs using Gill and Murray's NPSOL.  Because NPSOL
is not freely redistributable, this function is only available if you
have obtained your own copy of NPSOL.  @xref{Installation}.

The second argument is a string containing the name of the objective
function to call.  The objective function must be of the form

@example
y = phi (x)
@end example

@noindent
where x is a vector and y is a scalar.
@end ftable

