@c Copyright (C) 1992 John W. Eaton
@c This is part of the Octave manual.
@c For copying conditions, see the file gpl.texi.

@node System Utilities, Command History Functions, String Functions, Top
@chapter System Utilities

@findex clock

The function @code{clock} returns a vector containing the current year,
month (1-12), day (1-31), hour (0-23), minute (0-59) and second (0-60).
For example,

@example
octave:13> clock
ans =

  1993     8    20     4    56     1
@end example

@findex date

To get the date as a character string in the form DD-MMM-YY, use
the command @code{date}.  For example,

@example
octave:13> date
ans = 20-Aug-93
@end example

@findex shell_cmd

You can execute any shell command using the function @code{shell_cmd
(@var{cmd}, @var{flag})}.  The second argument is optional.  If it is
present, the output of the command is returned by @code{shell_cmd} as a
string.  If it is not supplied, any output from the command is printed,
with the standard output filtered through the pager.  For example,

@example
users = shell_cmd ("finger", 1)
@end example

@noindent
places the output of the command @code{finger} in the variable
@code{users}.

@findex getenv

You can find the values of environment variables using the function
@code{getenv}.  For example,

@example
getenv ("PATH")
@end example

@noindent
returns a string containing the value of your path.

@findex clc
@findex home

The functions @code{clc}, and @code{home} clear your
terminal screen and move the cursor to the upper left corner.

@findex cd

You can change the current working directory using the @code{cd}
command.  Tilde expansion is performed on the path.  For example, 

@example
cd ~/octave
@end example

@noindent
Changes the current working directory to @file{~/octave}.  If the
directory does not exist, an error message is printed and the working
directory is not changed.

@findex pwd

The command @code{pwd} prints the current working directory.

@findex dir
@findex ls

The functions @code{dir} and @code{ls} list directory contents.  For
example,

@example
octave:13> ls -l
total 12
-rw-r--r--   1 jwe      users        4488 Aug 19 04:02 foo.m
-rw-r--r--   1 jwe      users        1315 Aug 17 23:14 bar.m
@end example

The @code{dir} and @code{ls} commands are implemented by calling your
system's directory listing command, so the available options may vary
from system to system.

@findex computer

If possible, @code{computer} prints a string of the form
@var{cpu}-@var{vendor}-@var{os} that identifies the kind of computer
Octave is running on.  For example,

@example
octave:13> computer
sparc-sun-sunos4.1.2
@end example

@findex pause

The function @code{pause} allows you to suspend the execution of a
program.  If invoked without any arguments, Octave waits until you type
a character.  With a numeric argument, it pauses for the given number of
seconds.  For example, the following statement prints a message and then
waits 5 seconds before clearing the screen.

@example
fprintf (stderr, "wait please...\n"), pause (5), clc
@end example
