.TH FIG2DEV 1 "1 Sept 1990"
.SH NAME
fig2dev \- translates Fig code to various graphics languages

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fig2dev
.B \-L
.I language
[
.B \-m
.I mag
] [
.B \-f 
.I font
] [
.B \-s
.I fsize
] [
.I other options
] [
\fIfig-file\fR [ \fIout-file\fR ] ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Fig2dev
translates fig code in the named
.I fig-file
into the specified graphics 
.I language
and puts them in
.I out-file.
The default
.I fig-file
and
.I out-file
are standard input and standard output, respectively
.LP
Fig (Facility for Interactive Generation of figures) is a screen-oriented
tool which allows the user to draw and manipulate objects interactively.
Various versions of Fig run under the Suntools/Sunview window environment
and under version 11 of the X Windows System.
Fig2dev is compatible with Fig versions 1.3, 1.4, 2.0, and 2.1.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-L
Set the output graphics language.
Valid languages are
\fBbox, epic, eepic, eepicemu, latex, null, pic, pictex, ps, pstex, pstex_t,\fR
and
.B textyl.
.TP
.B \-m
Set the magnification at which the figure is rendered to
.I mag.
The default is 1.0.
.TP
.B \-f 
Set the default font used for text objects to
.I font.
The default is Roman; the format of this option depends on the graphics
.I language
in use.
In TeX-based languages, the font is the base of the name given in lfonts.tex,
for instance \"cmr\" for Roman, or \"tt\" for teletype.
In PostScript, it is any font name known to the printer or interpreter.
.TP
.B \-s
Set the default font size (in points) for text objects to
.I fsize.
The default is 11*mag, and thus is scaled by the \fB-m\fR option.
If there is no scaling, the default font is eleven point Roman."
.TP
.I other options
The other options are specific to the choice of graphics
.I language,
as described below.

.SH EPIC OPTIONS
EPIC is an enhancement to LaTeX picture drawing environment.
It was developed by Sunil Podar of Department of Computer Science
in S.U.N.Y at Stony Brook.
.LP
EEPIC is an extension to EPIC and LaTeX picture drawing environment
which uses tpic specials as a graphics mechanism.
It was written by Conrad Kwok of Division of
Computer Science at University of California, Davis.
.LP
EEPIC-EMU is an EEPIC emulation package which does not use tpic specials.
.TP
.B \-S
Set the scale to which the figure is rendered.
This option automatically sets the 
.I magnification
and size to
.I scale
/ 12 and 
.I scale
respectively.
.TP
.B \-l
Use "\fB\\thicklines\fR" when width of the line is wider than 
.I lwidth.
The default is 2.
.TP
.B \-v
Include comments in the output file.
.TP
.B \-P
Generate a complete LaTeX file. In other words, the ouput file can be
formatted without requiring any changes. The additional text inserted
in the beginning and at the end of the file is controlled by the
configuration parameter "Preamble" and "Postamble".
.TP
.B \-W
Enable variable line width
.TP
.B \-w
Disable variable line width. Only "\fB\\thicklines\fR" and/or
"\fB\\thinlines\fR" commands will be generated in the output file.
.LP
When variable line width option is enabled, "\fB\\thinlines\fR"
command is still used when line width is less than
\fILineThick\fR. One potential problem is that the width of
"\fB\\thinlines\fR" is 0.4pt
but the resolution of Fig is 1/80 inch (approx. 1pt). If
\fILineThick\fR is set to 2, normal lines will be drawn in 0.4pt
wide lines but the next line width is already 2pt. One possible
solution is to set \fILineThick\fR to 1 and set the width of the
those lines you want to be drawn in "\fB\\thinlines\fR"  to 0.

Due to this problem, Varible line width \fIVarWidth\fR
is defaulted to be false.

.SH LATEX OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-l
Sets the threshold between LaTeX thin and thick lines to 
.I lwidth
pixels.
LaTeX supports only two different line width: \\thinlines and \\thicklines.
Lines of width greater than
.I lwidth
pixels are drawn as \\thicklines.
Also affects the size of dots in dotted line style.
The default is 0.
.TP
.B \-d
Set a seperate magnification for the length of line dashes to
.I dmag.
.TP
.B \-v
Verbose mode.
.LP
LaTeX cannot accurately represent all the graphics objects which can
be described by Fig.
For example, the possible slopes which lines may have are limited.
Some objects, such as spline curves, cannot be drawn at all.
Fig2latex chooses the closest possible line slope, and prints error
messages when objects cannot be drawn accurately

.SH PICTEX OUTPUT
In order to include PiCTeX pictures into a document, it is necessary to
load the PiCTeX macros.
.LP
PiCTeX uses TeX integer register arithmetic to generate curves,
and so it is very slow.
PiCTeX draws curves by \fB\\put\fR-ing the \fIpsymbol\fR repeatedly,
and so requires a large amount of TeX's internal memory,
and generates large DVI files.
The size of TeX's memory limits the number of plot symbols in a picture.
As a result, it is best to use PiCTeX to generate small pictures.

.SH POSTSCRIPT OPTIONS
.TP
.B -c
option centers the figure on the page.
The centering may not be accurate if there are texts in the
.I fig_file
that extends too far to the right of other objects.
.TP
.B -P
indicates that the figure describes a full page which will not
necessarily be inserted into a document, but can be sent directly
to a PS printer.
This ensures that a showpage command is inserted at the end of
the figure, and inhibits translation of the figure coordinate system.
.TP
.B -l dummy_arg
Rotate figure to landscape mode.  The dummy argument is ignored,
but must appear on the command line for reasons of compatibility.
.LP

.SH PSTEX OPTIONS
.TP
The
.B pstex
language is a variant of
.B ps
which suppresses formatted (special) text.
The
.B pstex_t
langauge has the complementary behavior: it generates only LaTeX commands to
necessary to position special text, and to overlay the
PostScript file generated using
.B pstex.
These two drivers can be used to generate a figure which combines the
flexibility of PostScript graphics with LaTeX text formatting of
special text.
Overlaying of the PostScript file uses the
.B psfig
macro package.
.TP
The
.B pstex_t
option 
.B -p file
specifies the name of the PostScript file to be overlayed.
If not set or its value is null then no PS file will be inserted.
.LP

.SH TEXTYL OPTIONS
There are no TeXtyl-specific options.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
[x]fig(1),
pic(1)
pic2fig(1),
transfig(1)
.SH AUTHORS
Micah Beck (beck@svax.cs.cornell.edu)
.br
Cornell University
.br
Sept 28 1990
.sp
and Frank Schmuck (then of Cornell University)
.br
and Conrad Kwok (then of U.C. Davis).
.sp
drivers contributed by
.br
Jose Alberto Fernandez R. (U. of Maryland)
.br
and Gary Beihl (MCC)
.sp
Modified from f2p (fig to PIC), by the author of Fig
.br
Supoj Sutanthavibul (supoj@sally.utexas.edu)
.br
University of Texas at Austin. 

