\input texinfo
@setfilename eplain.info
@settitle Expanded Plain @TeX{}

@finalout

@c Here is what I use in the Info `dir' file:
@c * Eplain: (eplain).		Expanding on plain TeX.

@ifinfo
This file documents the Eplain macros.

Copyright (C) 1989, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94 Karl Berry.
Steven Smith wrote the documentation for the commutative diagram macros.
(He also wrote the macros.)

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).
@end ignore

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the
section entitled ``GNU General Public License'' is included exactly as
in the original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that the section entitled ``GNU General Public License'' may be
included in a translation approved by the author instead of in the
original English.
@end ifinfo


@titlepage
@title Expanded Plain @TeX{}
@subtitle March 1994
@subtitle For version 2.5.
@author Karl Berry
@author Steven Smith
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1989, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94 Karl Berry.
Steven Smith wrote the documentation for the commutative diagram macros.
(He also wrote the macros.)

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the
section entitled ``GNU General Public License'' is included exactly in
the original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that the section entitled ``GNU General Public License'' may be
included in a translation approved by the author instead of in the
original English.
@end titlepage

@headings double

@c We use the program index for file extensions.  (We want them to come out
@c in typewriter, but saying `@cindex @t{.aux} file', say, doesn't work.)
@synindex pg fn


@ifinfo
@node Top
@top Eplain

The Eplain macros provide functionality that is intended to be
useful regardless of how your document is actually formatted.
This manual is for Eplain version 2.5.

@menu
* Introduction::                Eplain's purpose and philosophy.
* Installation::                How to install Eplain.
* Invoking Eplain::             
* User definitions::            Macros to be used in a document.
* Arrow theoretic diagrams::    Macros for commutative diagrams.
* Programming definitions::     Macros to be used in writing other macros.
* Copying::                     
* Freedom::                     
* Macro index::                 Entries for TeX and Eplain control sequences.
* Concept index::               General index.

 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

User definitions

* Diagnostics::                 Tracing information.
* Rules::                       Changing the default rule dimensions.
* Citations::                   Using BibTeX and Eplain to make bibliographies.
* Displays::                    Changing the formatting of math displays.
* Time of day::                 Producing the time of day.
* Lists::                       Producing numbered and unordered lists.
* Verbatim listing::            Producing text just as it appears.
* Contents::                    Making a table of contents.
* Cross-references::            Symbolically referring to pages or equations.
* Page references::             
* Justification::               Left- or right-justification, or centering.
* Tables::                      Producing ordered tables.
* Margins::                     Changing the margins directly.
* Multiple columns::            Getting output in two columns.
* Footnotes::                   Autonumbered footnotes; changing formatting.
* Fractions::                   A better way to produce fractions in text.
* Paths::                       Allowing line breaks in pathnames.
* Logos::                       Various logos.
* Boxes::                       Producing filled or open rectangles.

Citations

* Formatting citations::        Changing the way citations are printed.
* Formatting bibliographies::   Changing the way bibliographies are printed.

Displays

* Formatting displays::         General formatting of displays.

Lists

* Formatting lists::            Changing how the lists look.

Cross-references

* Defining generic references::  
* Using generic references::    

Page references

* Equation references::         

Equation references

* Formatting equation references::  
* Subequation references::      

Arrow theoretic diagrams

* Slanted lines and vectors::   
* Commutative diagrams::        

Commutative diagrams

* Arrows and morphisms::        
* Construction of commutative diagrams::  
* Commutative diagram parameters::  

Programming definitions

* Category codes::              Changing category codes.
* Allocation macros::           Non-outer versions of \newcount et al.
* Iteration::                   Doing `for' loops in TeX.
* Macro arguments::             Reading and ignoring them.
* Converting to characters::    Normalizing control sequences and spaces.
* Expansion::                   Controlling expansion.
* Obeying spaces::              Making whitespace count anywhere.
* Writing out numbers::         Making `1' into `one'.
* Mode-specific penalties::     
* Auxiliary files::             Testing for their existence.

Expansion

* \csn and \ece::               
* \edefappend::                 
* Hooks::                       Manipulating and executing named actions.
* Properties::                  Associating information with a csname.
* \expandonce::                 
* \ifundefined::                
* \futurenonspacelet::          

Regain your programming freedom

* Software patents::            Algorithm monopolies.
* User interface copyright::    Forbidding upward-compatibility.
* What to do?::                 
@end menu

@end ifinfo


@include intro.texi
@include install.texi
@include invoke.texi
@include userdef.texi
@include arrow.texi
@include progdef.texi
@include copying.texi
@include freedom.texi
@include csindex.texi
@include index.texi


@contents

@bye
