\input texinfo
@setfilename kpathsea.info
@settitle Kpathsearch library

@set version 1.8
@set month-year April 1994

@c Define new indices for commands in auxiliary files, filenames, and options.
@defcodeindex cm
@defcodeindex fl
@defcodeindex op

@c Put everything in one index (arbitrarily chosen to be the concept index).
@syncodeindex cm cp
@syncodeindex fl cp
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex ky cp
@syncodeindex op cp
@syncodeindex pg cp
@syncodeindex vr cp

@c Here is what we use in the Info `dir' file:
@c * Kpathsearch: (kpathsea).	File lookup along search paths.


@ifinfo
This file documents the Kpathsearch library.

Copyright (C) 1993, 94 Karl Berry.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries a copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).
@end ignore

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the
section entitled ``Freedom'' and ``GNU General Public License'' are
included exactly as in the original, and provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that the sections entitled ``Freedom'' and ``GNU General Public
License'' may be included in a translation approved by the Free Software
Foundation instead of in the original English.
@end ifinfo


@titlepage

@title Kpathsearch library
@subtitle for version @value{version}
@subtitle @value{month-year}
@author Karl Berry

@page

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1993, 94 Karl Berry.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the
sections entitled ``Regain your programming freedom'' and ``GNU General
Public License'' are included exactly as in the original, and provided
that the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of
a permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that the sections entitled ``Regain your programming freedom''
and ``GNU General Public License'' may be included in a translation
approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in the original English.

@end titlepage


@ifinfo
@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@top Kpathsearch library

This manual documents how to install and use the Kpathsearch library for
filename lookup.  It corresponds to version @value{version}
(released in @value{month-year}).

@menu
* Introduction::                A brief overview.
* Installation::                Compilation, installation, and bug reporting.

* Path specifications::		User interface.
* TeX support::			Special support for TeX lookups.

* Copying::                     Conditions for copying, modifying and sharing.
* Freedom::                     Regain your programming freedom.
* Index::                       General index.
@end menu
@end ifinfo

@include intro.texi
@include install.texi

@include userspec.texi
@include tex-doc.texi

@include copying.texi
@include freedom.texi
@include index.texi

@contents

@bye
